*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 58531 ***












                          Transcriber's Note:

This version of the text cannot represent certain typographical effects.
Italics are delimited with the underscore character as _italic_.

Footnotes have been moved to follow the paragraphs in which they are
referenced.




  History of the Second Massachusetts Battery (Nims' Battery) of Light
                               Artillery

[Illustration: Capt. Ormand F. Nims in War Time.]




              HISTORY OF THE SECOND MASSACHUSETTS BATTERY
                            (NIMS' BATTERY)
                           OF LIGHT ARTILLERY

                               1861-1865

                COMPILED FROM RECORDS OF THE REBELLION,
                 OFFICIAL REPORTS, DIARIES AND ROSTERS

                                   By
                          CAROLINE E. WHITCOMB

                           THE RUMFORD PRESS
                         CONCORD, NEW HAMPSHIRE
                                  1912

                                CONTENTS


              NIMS' SECOND MASSACHUSETTS BATTERY         7

              NIMS' BATTERY ASSOCIATION                 73

              LIFE OF COL. ORMAND F. NIMS               79

              ROSTER OF SECOND MASSACHUSETTS BATTERY    85




                         LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


        Capt. Ormand F. Nims in War time          _Frontispiece_

        Battery Encampment at Stewart's Place,                12
        Baltimore, 1861

        Landing of Federal Troops from                        38
        Transport, Laurel Hill

        Second, Fourth, and Sixth Massachusetts               47
        Batteries at Baton Rouge

        Col. Ormand F. Nims                                   73

        Old Nims Homestead at Deerfield, Mass.                79




                                PREFACE


During the years which have followed the close of the Civil War, there
have appeared many histories of various companies, regiments and
different divisions of the volunteer troops, all of value both to the
historian and to the participants in the great struggle. So far as can
be learned, almost nothing has been published of the military history of
the 2d Massachusetts Light Artillery, better known as Nims' Battery,
save a few short sketches necessarily incomplete and sometimes
inaccurate.

In 1870, at the Anniversary Dinner of the Nims' Battery Association, the
matter of "publishing a history of the battery during its service
throughout the war of the Rebellion, 1861-1865," was brought forward and
a committee was appointed to take the necessary steps toward this work.
The committee, which consisted of Col. O. F. Nims, J. S. Knowlton, John
R. Smith, A. M. Norcross, D. M. Hammond and A. B. Burwell, issued a call
to the members of the battery asking each one to forward to the
committee any information in his possession such as diaries, letters,
newspaper clippings or matter of any kind that might aid in the work,
and urging the hearty coöperation of all "to the end that the glorious
record made by Nims' Battery--second to no other--may not be suffered to
perish in oblivion in our day and generation, but be handed down to our
children and children's children for all time."

So far as can be ascertained, nothing further was done in the matter and
the only records to be found are those incorporated in the general
histories of the war or in war records, which are not always easy of
access.

At the request and through the generosity of a member of the Nims'
Family Association, the writer has prepared the following brief account
of the military career of Nims' Battery, together with the life of its
commander, the history of the Battery Association and the complete
roster. After a period of fifty years, it has been impossible to gather
together the personal reminiscences and to bring before our readers the
life of an artillery man as clearly as we could wish. We trust, however,
that there will be found in the pages of this book a fairly complete and
reasonably accurate record of the military career of this organization.

At a meeting of the Nims' Battery Association held on April 19, 1912,
the manuscript of the entire history was read to the members present and
received their support and commendation.

The author wishes to express her obligation to all who have assisted in
any way in the preparation of this work, and especially to W. G. Hidden,
Fitchburg, Mass., for the loan of diary, newspaper clippings and
suggestions, to Capt. E. K. Russell for his comments and suggestions and
to Mrs. Mathews, stepdaughter of Col. O. F. Nims for the loan of papers,
letters and pictures once the property of Colonel Nims. Thanks are also
due Clarence K. Knowlton for the copy of the diary of his father, J. S.
Knowlton, to Mrs. C. B. Maxwell for the diary of C. B. Maxwell, to Mr.
George Houghton, Newport, for the diary of his father, George Houghton.

The expense of the preparation and publication of the book has been
borne to a large degree by Mr. E. D. Nims of Kansas City whose
generosity is appreciated both by members of the Battery and by the
Nims' Family Association.

THE AUTHOR.




              Books Consulted in Preparation of this Work


War of the Rebellion, Official Records of the Union and Confederate
Armies.

Massachusetts in the Civil War. I. L. Bowen.

History of the Civil War. B. J. Lossing.

Putnam's Record of the Rebellion. Moore.

Century Company's War Book.

The Mississippi. J. V. Greene.

The Nineteenth Army Corps. Irwin.

Regimental and Battery Histories of New Hampshire and Massachusetts.
[Illustration: Camp of the Massachusetts Second Company Light Artillery,
at Stewarts Place, Baltimore]




                   NIMS' SECOND MASSACHUSETTS BATTERY


Few batteries during the Civil War saw more actual service than that
known officially as the 2d Massachusetts Light Artillery, but more
generally called Nims' Battery. Its career is well worth recording and
the part it played in the campaigns of the Department of the Mississippi
and the Gulf was by no means inconsiderable in the history of the war.

Previous to 1861, there existed in Boston a military organization called
the Boston Light Artillery or Cook's Battery. When the news came from
Baltimore that the Sixth Regiment had been fired on and the city was in
the hands of rioters, General Butler who was then in Philadelphia, asked
that this organization be sent forward immediately to the scene.

It was midnight of April 19, 1861, when the telegraph brought the
request: before the night of the 20th everything was in readiness and in
the early morning of the 21st the first battery from Massachusetts was
on its way to Baltimore for a period of three months' service.

It had not left Boston, however, before Governor Andrews gave orders for
the formation of a second battery and designated Major Moses Cobb as its
commander. Recruiting headquarters were opened on the 20th of April at
the Boston Light Artillery Armory under Major O. F. Nims, and in less
than two days two hundred men applied for enlistment. "Every member,
officers and men, was the greenest of raw material, but they were an
intelligent set of fellows and took to drilling as a duck to water."
_Colonel Nims._

Most of the men were from Boston and vicinity.

The first public appearance of the battery was on June 17, when a parade
was held on Boston Common, and on July 4 a detachment fired a salute at
morning, noon and night from the same historic spot.

On July 5 the battery was ordered to the camp of instruction at
Wollaston Heights, Quincy, on what was known as the Adams estate, which
consequently gave to the camp the name of Camp Adams. Here for a month,
the men were drilled in all the movements from the position of a soldier
to battery drill in the field and also as infantry and cavalry.

Target practise, too, was introduced and for that purpose targets were
placed at several points with reference to distance and correctness in
shooting. These afforded an excellent opportunity for the men to become
familiar with their guns.

On the 31st of July, the command was mustered into the United States
service under the name of the 2d Massachusetts Light Artillery, and from
the same date the officers were commissioned. This was the first three
years' battery from the state of Massachusetts.

It was supposed that Major Cobb would take the battery into service, but
he left the state abruptly and Governor Andrews sent Adjutant General
Schouler down to camp to ask Major O. F. Nims, an experienced officer,
to take command and get to Washington as soon as possible.

Nims replied: "I will accept a commission whenever it is tendered me but
I will not ask for one." It was then suggested that the company be
called on to elect a captain, but this did not meet with Major Nims'
approval as he had made up his mind not to owe his position to the men
under him. "No," said he, "make me an officer if you will and then ask
them what they think of it." He was therefore given the rank of captain,
the men were lined up and informed of what had been done. A wild shout
of approval was their reply, the men throwing their caps in the air as a
further demonstration of their satisfaction.

The roster of commissioned officers then was as follows:

Captain, Ormand F. Nims.

Senior 1st Lieut., John W. Wolcott.

Junior 1st Lieut., John Bigelow.

Senior 2d Lieut., Geo. G. Trull.

Junior 2d Lieut., Richard B. Hall.

NON-COMMISSIONED

1st Sergeant, Lowell A. Chamberlain.

Quarter Master Sergeant, Alden N. Norcross.

Chief of Piece with rank of Sergeant, Frank J. Whitcher, Warren K. Snow,
Augustus B. Burwell, Henry P. Cheever, Orlando C. Harvey, Edward K.
Russell.

Gunners with rank of Corporal, Joseph S. Knowlton, Francis E. Howe,
Joseph Ackerman, Wm. W. Jordan, Converse F. Livermore, Joseph W.
Greenleaf.

Chief of Caisson with rank of Corporal, Henry M. Wadsworth, Frederick A.
Bellows, Edwin A. Andrews, Chas. F. Sherman, Lucian A. Hodgdon, S. S.
Lincoln.

Artificers, C. W. Cobb, H. E. Brown, Seth H. Hatch, Peter Jacobus,
Joseph S. Haven, Reuben B. H. Gould.

An old artillery officer for many years in the English service visited
the camp frequently and said that he never saw better material than the
men in Nims' Battery. "They have," said he, "intelligence and will, and
a very few months of active service will find them in the front rank of
merit in their class." Boston _Journal_, August 8, 1861.

Preparations were made to break camp August 7, but owing to an accident
which befell the machinery of the steamer which was to convey the
battery to New York it was necessary to wait until the following day. A
quotation from a Boston paper dated August 8, 1861, is as follows:

    "The Light Artillery Company commanded by Capt. O. F. Nims, after
    some delay as to their departure, left this city this morning,
    shortly after one o'clock, on the Providence Railroad, for New York
    and Washington, via Stonington. They were paid off yesterday
    afternoon for their time of service up to departure. For two days
    the scene at the camp at Quincy was lively indeed, the men being
    actively engaged in packing and preparing for departure. They left
    the old quarters at shortly after 7 o'clock last evening and marched
    over the turnpike to this city, arriving at the Providence Railroad
    Station at a few minutes past 10 o'clock. At the depot were a
    considerable number of people who had been waiting for several hours
    for the arrival of the company.

    "As soon as the battery arrived at the station, the work of loading
    the gun carriages, wagons, horses, etc., was actively begun, each of
    the company lending a hand, and the work was accomplished in about
    two hours. This done, a few moments were given to saying a parting
    word to friends, after which the men were ordered to 'fall in,' and
    marched to the cars. On their departure, friends and lookers-on
    joined in giving three hearty cheers, which were enthusiastically
    responded to by the members of the company.

    "On the train were 156 men, 140 horses, and 21 carriages, including
    the four baggage wagons, well loaded with the camp equipage and
    baggage of the men. They were supplied with about 1200 rounds of
    cartridges, including a considerable amount of grape and canister.
    The men have three days rations with them."

    At the time of organization, the uniform adopted was of a
    semi-zouave type, dark blue with red trimmings, the trousers loose
    to the knee, with russet leather leggins--grey shirt, a cut away
    jacket buttoned at the top with a loop, and a regular military cap
    trimmed with red. This made a very attractive uniform. Unfortunately
    during the stay in Quincy, the salt air took out the color, and
    before going into service the men were provided with regulation
    United States uniforms.

    The guns were fine United States bronze ordnance guns from the
    Watervliet Arsenal, N. Y., rifled at Alger's Foundry in South Boston
    and throwing a shell made by Schenkel, a very ingenious German. One
    kind of shell was in the shape of a sugar loaf with hollowed bore
    filled with papier-maché and weighing ten and one-half pounds, a
    pound of powder being used to fire it. When discharged, the
    papier-maché would swell out, fill the grooves and give the shell a
    twist. The noise the projectile made on leaving the gun was very
    similar to that of a locomotive going through a tunnel. When the
    shell exploded, it flew all to bits--not two or three fragments but
    forty or fifty pieces.

    Another shell prepared by Schenkel was exceedingly deadly. It was
    filled with bullets and between the bullets sulphur was poured in to
    keep them in place. The horses were strong Vermont horses worth
    $150.00 to $200.00 each.

    Boston _Journal_, February 22, 1903.

So the journey began, by rail to Stonington, then by boat to New York,
then to Jersey City and over the old Camden and Amboy road to
Philadelphia, arriving there Monday morning, August 11, 1861.

A quotation from the Philadelphia _Evening Bulletin_ says:

"Captain Nims' celebrated Light Artillery consisting of six pieces of
rifled cannon, with caissons, ordnance wagons, one ambulance, together
with 140 horses arrived at Washington Avenue, at five o'clock. The
company consists of 150 men who are strong, hearty fellows just fitted
for artillery service. During the delay before starting for Baltimore,
the men sang several pieces, among them America and Glory Hallelujah.
The Union Volunteer Refreshment Committee provided them with breakfast
and the men were loud in their praise of Philadelphia beneficence."

On arriving at Baltimore the men went into camp on the estate of the
Confederate General J. E. B. Stuart on West Baltimore Street, the camp
bearing the name of Camp Hale. Here drill was resumed in earnest,
battery, piece and sabre drill and target practise.

A letter to the Boston _Journal_ bearing the date August 18, 1861 gives
the following picture of camp life.

    CAMP HALE, BALTIMORE,

    August 18, 1861.

    To the Editor of the Boston _Journal_:

    We came through Baltimore on the 12th, on our way from Camp Adams to
    this encampment, which is situated on West Baltimore Street, is a
    half-mile outside of the city, and in General Stuart's Park, which
    is a beautiful place for an encampment, though as a park it is
    pretty well used up. General Stuart is a general in the rebel army,
    and at this place there were seized five hundred stand of arms. We
    have plenty of fruit here, but do not eat much. The Baltimoreans use
    us well and treat us as if we were their own citizens, but this may
    be owing somewhat to our guns. There are a good many secessionists
    here, but they keep very quiet and we do not have much to say to
    them. Coming through Baltimore we enlivened the streets with "Glory
    Hallelujah," and some savage faces were shown to us, but the sight
    of our seven-shooters kept them very quiet.

    We have just returned from bathing, and for this purpose we go
    within one mile of the Relay House, the roads being lined with thick
    woods. Houses are very scarce outside of the city, and very old and
    small, looking like huts. On Saturday we marched to the Pratt Street
    depot for the purpose of receiving and escorting two of our
    Massachusetts regiments, but they did not arrive, thus disappointing
    us and themselves, we have no doubt. The captain has just learned
    that some arms are stored in Pratt Street, and has ordered our
    detachment to attend to examining the premises and putting things in
    order. To do this we take one baggage wagon, one gun, and
    twenty-five men, each armed with two seven-shooters and sabre, and
    thus we make easy work of it

    We like our officers. Our captain is a man in the right place. We
    all like him, for he looks out for the boys. And we have a fine set
    of men, are very happily situated and every evening we have camp
    life in full activity.

    Our camp is somewhat different from that of a regiment, not having
    quite such strict orders to conform to, and having no guard duty to
    perform, that being done by the Fourth Pennsylvania Regiment. We are
    in excellent health, having had but one sick man since we left Camp
    Adams. It is probable we shall remain here for the present. Today is
    Sunday and most of the men are writing home. It is quite warm, but
    we have had no warmer weather here than we found at home. All
    letters should be directed to "Camp Hale," Baltimore, care Capt. O.
    F. Nims, Second Company Massachusetts Artillery.

Encamped at Baltimore at the same time was the 17th Massachusetts, and a
letter written by a member of that regiment follows:

To the Boston _Journal_, September 5.

"Nims' Artillery is at our left hand and a better set of fellows,
officers and men were never brought together. May we remain together 'in
union and for the Union' is the hearty wish of our officers. Our band
goes over to their headquarters twice a week and the enlivening strains
cause joy to them and will help to unite the two commands in still
stronger fetters than the mere fact that we are all 'Bay State boys.'
That is a strong card out here and when we unite in symphony as well as
harmony it's a pretty good tune."--

The boys won the respect and esteem of the citizens of Baltimore, even
of the Southern sympathizers, and on October 16, the loyal citizens of
Ward 19 presented to the battery a flag 20 x 35 feet which was mounted
on a flag staff 100 feet in height prepared by the men.

The Baltimore _Clipper_ gives an account of the event:

"Yesterday afternoon, at 4 o'clock, a large flag 26 x 20 feet, was
raised to the top of the pole which is 100 feet high, erected by the
members of Nims' Boston Battery, at Camp Andrew, West Baltimore Street
extended. At the appointed hour the line was formed in the rear of the
pole, and the six-rifled cannon placed in front, in a line facing the
city. The 17th Massachusetts Regiment then formed a hollow square on the
north side, when the Rev. Mr. Marshall, of the Twelfth Presbyterian
Church, Franklin Street, by invitation, advanced to the center of the
square and offered a most fervent prayer, imploring divine mercies upon
this Government.

"At a signal given the flag was run to the top of the pole, during which
the band of the 17th Massachusetts Regiment struck up the Star Spangled
Banner, and at every tap of the bass drum a gun was fired. Three cheers
were then given for the Stars and Stripes, which were joined in by the
many hundreds present. Upon quiet being restored, the band played Yankee
Doodle and Hail Columbia, and at each sound of the bass drum there was a
gun fired. This manner of salute, which is very common in Boston, is
something new here, and created considerable applause.

"After the ceremonies had ended, we were invited to take a stroll
through the camp, which we accepted, and were much gratified with our
visit. We found the men to be the most gentlemanly and agreeable set of
fellows it has been our pleasure to meet for a long time. This battery
does all its own work, such as horse-shoeing, harness making, saddling,
etc.

"From the general appearance of things, it looks as if they intended to
quarter there for the winter, although all with whom we conversed seemed
anxious to go to the seat of war. Their pieces are all marked No. 2, but
this is certainly the 'No. 1' Battery, and is so considered by all who
know them, and any person who does not know them to be such, only need
witness one of their drills to be convinced of the fact. The flag was a
present from the Union men of the 19th Ward."

Still another clipping from a Boston newspaper for the truth of which we
will not vouch, however, is entitled "None but the Brave deserve the
Fair." "We learn by a private letter written by a member of 'Nims' Light
Battery' from Baltimore, that its members are a little inclined to make
sad havoc with the affections of the young ladies of that city. 'Within
the last few weeks three or four marriages have taken place. The
"Battery boys" have been in great favor with the Union people ever since
their arrival in the city, and by their gentlemanly behavior and good
conduct have strengthened their friends' worthy appreciation. Within a
fortnight one of them, a young man of Boston, led to the altar a
daughter of one of the most respectable and wealthy Union citizens of
Baltimore. One of the lieutenants and two privates have also enjoyed the
pleasure of married life.'"

On the 4th of November the battery, together with the 4th Wisconsin
Regiment, Col. H. E. Paine, and an independent company of Pennsylvania
cavalry, Captain Richards, started on an expedition down the Chesapeake,
landing at Whitehaven, Md., on the Wiacomo River and marching to
Princess Ann where they spent the night in the court house. The next
day, the march was continued to Snow Hill. On that day, the men
experienced some of the minor hardships of a soldier's life, for we read
in the diary of George Houghton:

"A very hard march in the rain over awful roads of sand and mud and the
last two miles the water two feet deep. Some of the infantry gave out as
this was their first experience and we took them on our wagons and
caissons. After traveling twenty miles we had to go to bed without any
supper for the _Jersey Blue_, the boat carrying our rations, lost its
way up the river and was a day late. I slept in the guard tent and most
froze to death."

Another says: "We were quartered in a negro church but no peace for the
weary or hungry there. As our rations had not arrived, we came out minus
on the supper question, all the food having been secured for the
infantry, who had seen hard marching and wading for a first experience."

The day previous to the arrival at Snow Hill had been election day and
the vote in the town had stood one majority in favor of secession.

After a day or two in the negro church, camp was made in the woods near
by in connection with the 4th Wisconsin and the cavalry. Sibley tents
were given out and as one of the privates writes home: "They are real
nice and comfortable though there is no means for hanging up clothes. We
have purchased a camp kettle and are cooking by detachments."

The appearance of the country was unfamiliar to our New England boys and
one writes: "I've scarcely seen anything that deserves to be called a
hillock and the soil is either wet, sandy, or swampy." Quite a change
from the rock ribbed hills and mountains of the homeland. However, while
critical of soil and landscape, Maryland oysters met with universal
approbation. Baked beans too had a familiar taste though sometimes when
baked in a Dutch-oven underground the sand found its way in, giving a
flavor not approved by Bostonians.

The purpose of this Eastern Shore campaign as it was called was to make
a demonstration of Union forces in Somerset and Worcester counties, Md.,
where the feeling was strong for secession and where troops for the
Confederacy were being recruited. On November 14, camp was broken at
Snow Hill and the battery marched sixteen miles to Newtown, Md., where
it joined the larger body of troops under General Lockwood.

The whole force now consisted of detachments from the 4th Wisconsin,
21st Indiana, 6th Michigan, 5th New York, 2d Delaware, Pursell's Legion
of Maryland, 17th Massachusetts, Richard's Cavalry and the 2d
Massachusetts Light Battery all in command of General Lockwood.

November 13, General Dix had issued a proclamation[1] to the inhabitants
of Accomac and Northampton counties, Virginia, urging them to peace and
loyalty. To enforce this proclamation General Lockwood with his brigade
left Newtown and went by way of Drummondtown and Belleville to Eastville
toward the end of the peninsula.

Footnote 1:

  See Off. Records, Vol. 5, p, 431.

The battery arrived at Drummondtown, November 21. This was Thanksgiving
Day and we read, "Poultry very plenty on the way. Bought (?) two turkeys
and a goose for our dinner. Grand mistake of Corporal S. in boiling a
chicken with a bar of soap."

On the way from Drummondtown to Eastville scouting parties were sent out
and in these the members of the battery took part capturing seven
six-pound guns, several hundred muskets, ammunition, and a brass
twelve-pound Howitzer which had been buried in the woods. December 1, a
grand review was held by General Lockwood.

As it was evident the Confederate forces had left the country and the
purpose of the expedition had been accomplished, preparations were made
for the return to Baltimore.

Accordingly on December 12, the battery again went on board the
_Pocahontas_ and returned to its former camp in Baltimore after an
absence of forty-seven days during which "the only sanguinary occurrence
was the capture and slaughter of turkeys, geese, and other fowls for
which severe punishment was meted out by General Lockwood."

One of the men in a letter written home at this time writes: "We were
amused somewhat at one time on the trip by the astonishment of an old
darky who seeing our brigade inquired, 'Has all you genn'men got names?'
and while we were waiting several days near the landing for
transportation we spent our time out of doors and bathing in the waters
of the bay which we thought pretty good for December."

On the 18th of December, Lieutenants Wolcott and Bigelow resigned to
accept positions in a Maryland battery. Second Lieutenants Trull and
Hall were promoted to their positions and the vacancies were filled by
the commissioning of William Marland of Andover and Sergeant Warren K.
Snow of Boston as second lieutenants.

Life at Camp Andrew from December till the following February was
uneventful though by no means idle. The men worked hard, drills were
held almost daily furnishing perhaps an explanation for the later record
of the battery when real warfare began. In regard to this Capt. E. K.
Russell writes:

"One of the things that won the love of the Union men of Baltimore was
the frequent battery drills through the streets of that city. Captain
Nims was always in command and the rapid movements of the battery as a
whole, in sections, or single guns, stationed at certain points to
command all avenues of approach at given points were simply marvellous.
Much of the work was done by the bugle and if the bugler was not at hand
our captain carried a small one under his arm and this would ring out
the commands with a snap so that not only the men took notice but even
the horses recognized the calls and jumped into the movements with a
will."

It is evident that Captain Nims had a high ideal of what a battery
should be and spared neither pains nor effort in his endeavor to reach
this ideal. "This morning, drill. We jumped ditches, pond holes,
anything that could be jumped, ran up banks six or eight feet high and
then had a run down street." "Had a foot drill today and it was rough
double quick--then the captain gave us instructions on dress parade."
"Sabre drill on horseback." "Spent about all day cleaning up harnesses,
horses, etc. Captain came around and examined them." And so on day after
day.

Naturally new conditions of life prevailed and as some one has said
"Citizens had to be made into soldiers." The regret manifested by the
people of Baltimore when the battery was ordered south speaks well for
the conduct and character of its men. Discipline of course was strictly
maintained and we are not surprised to read in one diary, "Privates --
and -- had to walk in barrels eight hours a day for three days"; or "--
was threatened with a barrel for missing roll call this morning." But
certainly this does not seem like a very heinous offence to the
civilian.

Letters from home were eagerly welcomed. In one diary opposite the date
December 25 we read "Letter from home--good Christmas present that"; and
another writes "I don't get my letters so often as I wish I did." Boxes
too were gladly received and their contents shared with less fortunate
comrades.

A quotation from the Boston _Journal_ of February gives a picture of a
social event in camp. "The first grand ball of the battery came off at
Stewart's Hall, Baltimore, on Monday evening and was a grand success.
The floor managers and musicians were all members of the battery. The
order of dances consisted of a grand promenade, four quadrilles, some
fancy dances and wound up with a 'walk around' by Mr. C. We hope to have
our next ball in Boston among our friends."

It was expected that the battery would now be attached to the Army of
the Potomac but on the organization of Gen. B. F. Butler's expedition,
Captain Nims and his men were assigned to the Department of the Gulf and
the Mississippi. Accordingly on February 25, 1862 the battery left
Baltimore and went by steamer _Columbia_ to Fort Monroe camping near
Hampton in view of the mouth of the James River and of Hampton Roads.
Here the men witnessed the destruction of the warships _Congress_ and
_Cumberland_ by the ram _Merrimac_ and the encounter between the
_Monitor_ and the _Merrimac_. The following interesting account of the
same is taken from a record written by S. P. Skilton, a member of the
battery.

"On the 8th of March at noon we heard heavy firing toward Newport News
and the steam frigates _Roanoke_ and _Minnesota_ and quite a lot of
gunboats went up that way engaging the battery at Sewall's Point though
their fire fell far short of it. The old steam frigate _Merrimac_ had
been cut down and iron clad by the Confederates and was whipping our
vessels, as they were all wooden ones and could make scarcely any
impression on the ironplated monster. After about an hour's hard
fighting the _Merrimac_ ran her prow into the _Cumberland_, causing her
to fill with water and rendering her useless.

"Commodore Morris would not surrender nor haul down the flag but kept at
work at the guns till water covered the decks. Night coming on, the
_Merrimac_ anchored off Sewall's Point. That was a dark night for us, as
with one exception nothing looked hopeful. We were cut off from help
landward, the _Congress_ was burned, the _Cumberland_ sunk, the
_Minnesota_ was aground and the _Roanoke_ helpless with a broken shaft,
while nothing seemed to check the ram at all. About midnight the
_Congress_ blew up. Among the dark rumors that night came a grain of
hope in the report that an iron cased battery, the _Ericsson_ which had
been expected had arrived and would engage the _Merrimac_ in the
morning. Still it was but a grain.

"Light on that Sabbath morning showed the new helper lying behind the
_Minnesota_ but looking rather insignificant. About eight o'clock the
_Merrimac_ came saucily out accompanied by the _Jamestown_ and
_Yorktown_, wooden steamers and evidently expecting to have it all her
own way as on the previous afternoon. As she approached the _Minnesota_
the new comer came out from behind, which caused her to hesitate. She
soon came on again when the _Ericsson_ engaged her for several hours. At
one o'clock the _Merrimac_ hauled away for Norfolk with her guns all
disabled while the _Ericsson_ was not damaged at all. You can imagine
there was great relief on the part of those who had stood watching and
feeling that their own welfare depended on the outcome of that fight."

The night preceding this naval battle one section of the battery under
Lieutenant Trull accompanied by a company of 1st Delaware was on picket
duty at White Gate, guarding the cross roads as an attack by land was
looked for. The men stood at their guns all night, but morning dawned
without the appearance of the enemy. At the same time the left section
was stationed at Hampton Bridge under Lieutenant Hall. The morning of
the same day the battery was ordered to Hampton Creek, where it remained
for four hours firing several shots at the _Merrimac_, which was,
however, too far away to be reached.

While in camp at Fort Monroe there was a grand review of all the troops
by General Wool and also during their stay General McClellan's army of
125,000 marched by on their way to Yorktown. Speaking of the stay at
Fort Monroe, Captain Russell writes: "This was one of the most trying
times for the battery. We were all anxious to get to the front somewhere
and while encamped here, along came the Army of the Potomac on the way
to Yorktown. Day after day a continuous stream of men and batteries
passed us calling to us 'Come on, get into the swim with us.'"

While here the battery had an opportunity to compete with one of the
regulars in target practise. "Several Confederate steamers, the
_Merrimac_ among them, came out of Norfolk and lay in line off Sewall's
Point. The battery was ordered to Hampton Creek with a battery of the
regular army on the left. About 4 P. M. the _Merrimac_ moved a little
nearer and fired at the Union steamer _Naugatuck_, but burst a gun and
fell back disabled. The regular battery fired a few shot at her but fell
short two miles. The right section of our battery fired at an elevation
of 30° by sinking the trail in the ground, the first shot bursting just
on the other side of the _Merrimac_--a distance of four and one-half
miles. We received much praise for our gunnery." _Diary, W. G. Hidden._

"The next day we trained a gun on Sewall's Point and fired a shell. It
went so close to the far-away beach that Captain Nims said 'Give her a
little more elevation.' We dug the hole a little deeper, put her muzzle
a little higher and the captain's next shell landed plumb on the point.
That was five miles away."

To quote again from Captain Russell: "Our stay in the vicinity of Fort
Monroe was about seven weeks. During that time we had seen much and done
little so that when the old ship _DeWitt Clinton_ reported as ready to
bear us to the Southland for more active service we were all glad. But
the loading of all our horses on the ship and placing them in stalls
below deck was no small job. Then came the guns and carriages,
ammunition, forges, etc. But at last all was ready and as we sailed past
the capes and the old ship headed southward we felt that at last we were
off for the place awaiting us where we could do something for the
integrity of our country and its flag. Our voyage was a pleasant one, no
sickness of a serious character, the men cheerful and spending much time
in making souvenirs of the voyage out of anything at hand. One thing did
occur which made a lasting impression on the minds of those who
witnessed it. Our ship was to report at Ship Island for further orders.
After we had rounded Cape Florida one night, with our good ship under
full sail and a free wind, the cry came from the lookout, 'Rocks ahead.'
All of us who were on deck and those who could quickly reach it saw on
each side of the bow of the ship and not far distant towers of rocks. No
time was left to turn the ship to right or left, and so the man at the
wheel could do nothing but let her go straight ahead. We braced
ourselves for the expected shock, that would send us all to a watery
grave. Seconds seemed hours. As we passed the rocks it seemed that one
could throw a stone and hit them on either side. No shock came. Our ship
went through into open water, she was rounded up into the wind, sails
clewed up and anchor let go and we all breathed again. When morning came
we found that our navigator had made a great mistake in his calculations
and we had been piloted in safety through Dead Men's Keys. By whom? By
God, in whose service we were. With grateful hearts we sailed away and
reached Ship Island without further incident."

Ship Island was reached on the 14th after a passage of twenty-two days.
A letter from Thomas N. Palmer written the following day:

"We have had a very pleasant voyage, no serious storm since we left Fort
Monroe--a good steady old ship. The boys are all in good spirits and
ready for anything. This war is fast drawing to a close and we shall
soon be traveling north." Of the 134 horses belonging to the battery
only four died on the trip, a rather unusual record at that time. As the
government valued each horse reaching Ship Island at $700 this was
regarded as a decidedly favorable passage from a financial point of
view.

At Ship Island news was received of the taking of New Orleans two weeks
before and the battery proceeded at once up the Mississippi arriving at
New Orleans on the morning of May 24 and camping at the Pelican Cotton
Press. It was now assigned to General Williams' Brigade and in less than
a week ordered on board the steamers _Burton_ and _Diana_ for Baton
Rouge where it arrived on June 1. "Here we found our old Eastern Shore
comrades, the 4th Wisconsin and 6th Michigan regiments, who greeted us
with hearty cheers and still more to the point furnished us with hot
coffee." During this time the men were sent on scouting expeditions
capturing some prisoners, seizing everything of value and burning some
of the plantations which served as Confederate strongholds. On one of
these expeditions the left section together with the 30th Massachusetts
and two companies of the 4th Wisconsin captured 40,000 lbs. of sugar,
molasses, cattle, sheep, mules, and wagons, and took prisoners one
lieutenant and four privates.

The battery now prepared to join in the expedition against Vicksburg and
on the 22d of June landed at Ellis Cliff in order to dislodge a hostile
force that had fired the day before on the Union transports passing up
the river. After a seven miles' march through the woods the enemy's camp
was reached where fires were burning and beans boiling but the occupants
had left in a hurry. The captain of the band was however captured in his
carriage. Two days later a similar movement was made at Grand Gulf where
the Confederates were driven from their position, five prisoners taken
and the town and railroad destroyed. Under the date June 24, "3 A. M.
Steamers with infantry and battery on board sailed up a bayou to get in
the rear of Grand Gulf. 10 A. M. Landed at Berry's Plantation. Formed
line of march, 4th Wisconsin and right half of battery in advance.
Marched two miles and found a small force of the enemy in the woods who
fired on our infantry. Colonel Paine ordered the right piece to the
front. He did not have to wait long for my horses were ready for a jump.
We soon reached the woods, fired a few shots at the enemy who saved
themselves by getting on board a train and steaming away. Fired at train
and struck the rear car completely shattering it. Marched five miles,
found enemy's camp on fire vacated an hour previous. Then into Grand
Gulf where we burned every building and destroyed the railroad track."
_J. S. Knowlton._

Two days later the expedition arrived at Point de Soto, three miles
below Vicksburg, where the battery was first under fire and had its
first lesson in real fighting. The occasion for this was incidental to
the passage of Farragut's fleet up the river. Farragut had received most
urgent Letters from the Navy Department urging upon him the clearing of
the Mississippi, Vicksburg being then the only point in the possession
of the Confederates. Although he felt that it was impossible to take the
city without a large land force, he prepared at once to make the
attempt. Sending on in advance a flotilla of mortar boats under
Commander D. D. Porter he followed with his fleet of three ships and
seven gunboats accompanied by ten transports carrying General Williams'
Brigade of four regiments and two batteries--the 2d and the 6th
Massachusetts.

To quote from J. S. Knowlton's diary: "Our mortar boats commenced
bombarding the city of Vicksburg at 4 P. M. We were ordered around the
backside of the woods so as to get unperceived to the nearest point to
Vicksburg. We marched over five miles and came to a halt on the railroad
about three quarters of a mile from the point where we were to go into
action. Here we dismounted and slept by our horses until the mortar
boats began firing which was a signal for us to start. The firing soon
became very severe, which indicated that the fleet had started. We
pushed down the railroad, shot and shell falling thick and fast all
around us, cutting off trees and plowing the soil at an enormous rate.
We soon reached the shore and concentrated our whole fire upon three
batteries of the enemy's right wing. Their batteries could be seen
blazing from all points of the city. We made some good shots, putting
our shell plumb within the enemy's works. They kept up a continual
firing on our fleets sending their shots with great rapidity. At 5 P.
M., the fleet having passed, we were ordered back to camp, having been
engaged an hour and a half. Not a man in our company was injured in the
whole engagement and only one horse was hit."

Another member of the battery writes: "Probably few grander sights were
to be had during the war than we saw that morning as Farragut in the
_Hartford_, just going enough to prevent the current getting the better
of him, led his fleet of wooden vessels through that deluge of shot and
shell." _S. P. Skilton._

At an inspection the next afternoon, Captain Nims said that Commodore
Farragut expressed much pleasure at the performance of the battery and
the aid it had rendered and stated that it was the hottest fire he was
ever under. The only part taken by the land forces in this expedition
was by the two Massachusetts batteries.

A few days later the fleet passed back down the river under a heavy fire
from Vicksburg and remained for some time in the vicinity of the city.

Before Vicksburg the river made one of those gigantic bends for which it
is famous.[2] For three miles it flowed directly toward the city and
then bending suddenly flowed in an exactly opposite direction. Between
these lines lay a peninsula scarcely a mile wide. When following the
course of the stream, a vessel going up or down the river was under fire
of the batteries for a distance of six miles. It was thought that if a
canal be dug across this peninsula the current of the river might wear a
channel by which boats could pass leaving them exposed for only one
mile. Accordingly General Williams was commissioned to gather a force of
negroes from the surrounding plantations to carry out this enterprise.
Some 1500 were brought in and set to work, but the plan did not succeed.
The position was not well chosen and before the work was completed the
river rose suddenly and destroyed all that had been accomplished.

Footnote 2:

  See The Mississippi, J. V. Greene.

It was now evident that while it was possible to send a fleet up the
river if necessary, Vicksburg could not be taken without a land force of
12,000 to 15,000 men. Accordingly, on July 24, Farragut's fleet,
together with the transports bearing General Williams' Brigade, started
down the river leaving Vicksburg entirely free. General Williams and his
troops debarked at Baton Rouge for the purpose of permanently occupying
it.

Of this entire movement Irwin says: "No casualties occurred but the
troops returned July 26 to Baton Rouge after having for more than three
months undergone hardships such as have seldom fallen to the lot of
soldiers in a campaign whose existence is scarcely known and whose name
is well nigh forgotten.

During the stay near Vicksburg many of the men contracted fever and on
July 19 occurred the first death among the members of the battery--that
of Theodore H. Price of Boston. Others followed in quick succession
until by August 8, six of the battery had fallen victims to the
soldier's worst foe, disease. These were: Theodore H. Price, died July
19; J. S. Haven, died July 31; Alvin Lovejoy, died August 2; Cyrus
Davidson, died August 5; E. L. Leavitt, died August 5; M. F. Tate, died
August 8.

Nor was this all, for at the grand review and inspection by General
Williams on July 31, of the 140 members of the battery only 21 were
present for duty, the remainder, including Captain Nims himself, being
in the hospital. The same condition naturally prevailed among the other
members of the brigade, one regiment (the 7th Vermont) mustering but 48
men and other regiments averaging 150; so that not one half of the
entire number was reported as ready for service.

When this state of affairs was made known to Major Van Dorn of the
Confederate Army, he organized an expedition to capture the post. It was
composed of about 5000 men under Gen. J. C. Breckenridge who expected to
be aided in his endeavor by the ram _Arkansas_. With his entire force
moving along the two roads that enter Baton Rouge from the southwest he
made a vigorous attack in the early morning of August 5. Williams was
expecting the attack (we read in the diary of one of the men that the
horses had been standing in harness three days and three nights), and
had arranged his forces to meet it. His army, depleted as it was by
sickness, numbered only 2500 effective men. He posted the 4th Wisconsin
on Bayou Gros on the extreme left, with a portion of Manning's Battery
in the arsenal grounds on its left. On the right of that regiment was
the 9th Connecticut with four of Manning's guns in the cemetery. To the
left of Greenwell Springs Road was the 14th Maine and next came the 21st
Indiana with four guns of Everett's Battery. The 6th Michigan was posted
across the country road with two guns. In the rear of the last two was
the 7th Vermont, and at the extreme right was the 30th Massachusetts
supporting Nims' Battery.[3]

Footnote 3:

  See Lossing's History of the Civil War.

Owing to the illness of Captain Nims, First Lieutenant Trull was in
command, while to take the place of the men in the hospital a detail of
thirty men had been secured from the 9th Connecticut so that when the
battle opened the six guns were manned.

The conflict lasted from four to nine o'clock, a period of five hours,
and throughout the entire battle Nims' Battery won the highest
commendation for efficient service. Perhaps nothing could give a better
account of what it accomplished than the Official Report of Colonel
Dudley:[4] "I immediately ordered Nims' Battery under the command of the
brave and efficient First Lieutenant Trull, to the left and considerably
to the front so as to clear the thick woods in its front. This battery
went into action within 250 yards of a Kentucky regiment sheltered by a
fence and a cornfield, where it remained doing excellent service until
ordered to change position. Officers and men could not have behaved
better. More coolness could not have been expected from veterans than
the officers and men of this battery displayed. They changed position
four times under my own observation and on each occasion the gallant
commander displayed his competency for the prominent part he acted in
this severest part of the field.... At one time the undaunted Trull with
his battery was hotly engaged on the right with a full battery of the
enemy which had approached within 150 yards (supposed to have been the
celebrated Simmes' Battery), but the 6th Michigan moved up to the
support of Nims' Battery in elegant order. Its assistance came most
fortunately for it was clear the enemy intended to outflank us at this
point.... At this juncture of the conflict I ordered Lieutenant Trull to
fire his three left pieces across the fronts of the Indiana 21st,
Massachusetts 30th, and 7th Vermont. This was the turning point of the
right wing. The galling fire of canister effectually silenced the
enemy's fire and they retreated to the rear."

Footnote 4:

  Off. Rep., Vol. 15, p. 39.

At one time the guns became so hot that it was impossible to use them
and it became necessary to wait. While water was being brought to cool
them a fierce attack was made by the enemy, but proved unsuccessful.

"At another time the enemy advanced bearing the Stars and Stripes until
they were within 25 yards of the battery who supposed them to be their
own men, but soon their artillery and infantry opened a tremendous fire,
too high, however, to do much damage. In an instant the guns were
discharged and the enemy mowed down like grass, the first fire killing
over 100. Great cheers and praises for Nims' boys could be heard all
over the battlefield." _Diary of J. S. Knowlton._

A correspondent of the Boston _Journal_ gives the following description
of the battle.

"Two highways run out of Baton Rouge--one above and one below,--on each
side of the town; about a mile and a half a road cuts these two roads at
right angles, while extending from road to road is a large cemetery,
facing towards the city and looking directly into the camps of the
Indiana, Massachusetts, and Connecticut regiments. The front of this
cemetery is fenced with paling, while the cemetery is thickly strewn
with large tombs and overgrown with high rank weeds. This was the
position of the rebel center. Our center was composed of the Indiana
21st, the Massachusetts and Connecticut, drawn up on the opposite side
of the roads, and not more than forty-five rods distant. The rebel right
approached through corn-fields and over a rolling country, attacked with
great impetuosity the 14th Maine's camp and drove them out, burning and
pillaging the camp in a few minutes. The 14th Maine rallied, and,
supported by the Massachusetts and Nims' Battery, returned to the attack
and drove the enemy back with great slaughter.

"The fiercest part of the conflict, at this tide of the battle, occurred
before and within a house which the rebels obstinately determined to get
possession of. The most conspicuous of the rebels at this place was a
huge negro, armed and equipped with musket, knapsack and uniform; he led
the rebels, and met his death at the hands of one of our men. Pressed
back by our left, and our ground regained, the battle raged in front
with desperate fierceness. So silently did the rebels approach, and so
well were they concealed, that they were in the cemetery and drawn up in
battle array without our knowing it. With a yell they rushed up to the
fence, dashed through it and across the road, bearing everything before
them. At one time the opposing forces were hand to hand, and our handful
of men were driven out of their camps and back into the town; but,
rallied on every hand by their officers, and the cool daring of General
Williams, assisted by the gunboats that began to fire shell on each bank
with perfect accuracy and deadly effect, our troops bravely rushed to
the front and drove the entire rebel center, back across the road, into
and beyond the cemetery, from which they were not again able to emerge."

From a description of the battle given by a soldier who was in the
fight, we extract the following:

"The 14th Maine, 21st Indiana and 6th Wisconsin were the first regiments
engaged. They held in check about eight thousand Confederates for about
one hour, when they were forced back a quarter of a mile, the
Confederates occupying their camps, which they destroyed. On account of
a heavy fog, the 7th Vermont, 9th Connecticut and 4th Wisconsin were not
able to ascertain the exact position of the enemy, and were of but very
little service until the new line was formed. Captain Nims[5], Captain
Everett, and the battery on the right, and two pieces of the 4th
Massachusetts on the extreme left, opened a murderous fire from their
batteries, which was returned with spirit by the Confederates. The
battle raged without a moment's intermission, and with great severity
for two hours. During this time nothing but a continual roar of
artillery, the rattle of musketry, the shouts of the combatants and the
groans of the wounded and dying was to be heard. Captain Nims' Battery
was compelled to fall back, his guns being so hot it was impossible to
use them.

Footnote 5:

  This is evidently incorrect as Captain Nims was in the hospital and
  Lieutenant Trull in charge.

"He took his position on the left of the 21st Indiana, and ordered water
to be brought to cool his guns. While thus engaged, three regiments of
the Confederates charged the 21st Indiana, and one regiment charged the
battery. General Williams, perceiving the perilous position of the
regiment, and knowing the consequences of having the center broken, took
his position at the head of the regiment, and gave the command to
prepare to charge. The regiment fired three volleys (the battalion
having breech-loading rifles), and allowed the Confederates to approach
within a few rods. General Williams then gave the command: 'Forward!
double quick!' and with a deafening cheer they rushed to the charge. The
shock of two such masses advancing shook the entire field.

"The struggle was fierce and the slaughter heavy. Four times the rebels
made desperate efforts to come from among the tombs and cross the road,
but were driven back each time, and finally they retreated in full
panic.

"On our right, in the meantime, the rebels, under General Clarke, made a
desperate effort to flank us and get in our rear. It was here that the
admirable generalship of Williams displayed itself. Anticipating this
very movement, he had placed Manning's battery of six pieces, supported
by the Wisconsin and Vermont regiments, while the Michigan Regiment was
strongly posted at the crossing of the roads and commanding the entire
approach of the enemy's left. Here the battle raged fiercely; and after
the rebels' flank movement was repulsed and driven back, not to return,
here it was that the gallant general fell, at the head of the Indiana
and Michigan regiments, but not before victory had lighted up that fine
manly face with its glow of triumph.

"This was the signal for a general onset on both sides. Captain Nims
lost two of his guns, but charged with his sabres and revolvers and
retook them. The 21st Regiment repulsed three times their own numbers,
and drove them back in confusion. I was at this time detached with the
first platoon of our company (4th Regiment Wisconsin), to skirmish on
the extreme left of the line, to prevent a surprise on our flank. I took
a position one mile outside the old picket lines, in true Yankee style,
behind stumps and trees. The rebels did not think it safe to honor us
with a shot. We were fired at, however, by some of our pickets, who were
driven in from the front, they mistaking us for rebels. They also
reported us to the gunboat _Essex_ as rebels, and she commenced shelling
our lines. The rebels were forced back a mile and a half."[6]

Footnote 6:

  Putnam's Record of the Rebellion, Vol. 5, p. 307.

In General Butler's General Orders we find the following eulogy of
General Williams: "A gallant general, an accomplished officer, a pure
patriot and victorious hero and a devoted Christian. In choosing his
position for the battle he gave up the vantage of the cover of the
houses of the city, forming his lines in the open field lest the women
and children of his enemies suffer in the fight."

In another report[7] honorable mention is made of Sergeant Cheever,
Privates Tyler and Clogston for the skill and bravery with which they
worked one of the guns when almost in the hands of the enemy, they
having left sick beds in order to do their duty.

Footnote 7:

  Off. Rec., Vol. 15, p. 46.

The courage and steadfastness of the Union troops is all the more
remarkable when we remember that as Weitzel says: "None of our men had
been in battle and few had been under fire. The entire Union loss in
this battle was reported as 77 killed and 240 wounded. Of this number
the battery lost four wounded, one detailed from the 9th Connecticut
receiving a mortal wound, and one man was captured."

When the conflict was over, General Butler said: "Nims' Battery saved
the day," and Breckenridge himself was heard to remark: "If it had not
been for that Light Artillery in front, I would have taken the place, I
charged it three times, but was knocked back every time." Boston
_Journal_.

Breckenridge had made a speech to his men early that morning promising
them to have his band playing in the state house by nine o'clock.

It was expected that another attempt might be made to regain Baton
Rouge, as a few days after the battle a flag of truce came in from the
Confederates ordering General Paine, the Union leader, to withdraw his
forces. Preparations were immediately made for the defense of the city;
all public buildings were burned and trees cut down that might interfere
with the range of the guns. The men of the battery lay by their guns all
night, but the next morning it was found that the enemy had retreated,
burning their bridges behind them. A few days later Breckenridge marched
his troops to Port Hudson, thirty miles above and began there the
construction of heavy batteries.

Soon after the Union forces left Baton Rouge, and on August 21 the
entire command left for New Orleans. The battery first camped at
Carrollton but changed the next day to Materia Ridge where it joined the
brigade under Colonel Dudley consisting of 30th Massachusetts, 4th
Wisconsin, 21st Indiana, 6th Michigan, 7th Vermont, 14th Maine, 9th
Connecticut, 2d, 4th and 6th Massachusetts batteries and 21st Indiana
Battery.

The location did not prove healthful, however, and a week later camp was
once more changed to Tivoli Circle, New Orleans.

On August 22 Privates Lombard and Barnes died at St. James Hospital.
Indeed, sickness followed the battery and in every record we read: "Have
been in hospital two weeks." "Came to hospital to-day." "Two more men on
the sick list." In the month of October eleven members, some of whom had
been in the hospital for weeks were discharged and came home. During the
stay in New Orleans, however, the men began to regain their health.

The time from August to December was spent largely in drilling, a parade
and some form of drill constituting a part of each day's duty.
Inspection of men and quarters was common and some will doubtless
remember an acting inspector general who ordered Corporal ------ to get
his hair cut, much to the amusement of the boys as said corporal wore a
wig. On Thanksgiving Day some of the men fought off the pangs of
homesickness by preparing a grand dinner. "The best I've eaten since I
left home," while others in the evening gave a grand ball where the
music consisted of three violins, a cornet and a banjo.

About this time Lieutenant Trull left to take command of the 4th
Massachusetts Battery, Second Lieutenant Marland was advanced to First,
and First Sergeant Edw. K. Russell of Chelsea was commissioned to fill
the vacant second lieutenancy. On September 8 the death of J. K. Harvey
was reported.

General Banks having succeeded General Butler on December 16 in command
of the Department of the Gulf, the troops in Louisiana were organized as
the 19th Army Corps composed of four divisions and Nims' Battery was
assigned to the fourth division commanded by Gen. Cuvier Grover and
ordered to report at Baton Rouge. Here it remained until March 13,
spending much time in drill--drilling on pieces, as cavalry and with
flying movements, and occasionally doing picket duty.

"At this time, while some of our men were acting as pickets several
miles outside the town, an incident occurred that, had it taken place in
the North would have been called 'a Yankee trick,' but as it is we
disclaim it, and let our Southern brother have all the honor (?). Some
of our men were acting as mounted pickets, and as they sat upon their
horses looking up the road, and listening for the footfall of horse or
man, a sharp sound of a bell came from the thick timber land on their
side and quickly their ears were open and with eager eyes they sought to
fathom the cause of the sounds, when tinkle-tinkle-tinkle came the
sounds again and as it fell upon the ears of our men it took them back
to their boyhood days when sent for the cows. They listened for the
welcome sound of tinkle-tinkle-tinkle. Oh it is only an old cow in the
brush: but they soon learned from the bullets' whiz that they had better
be moving, and they did." _Captain Russell._

On another occasion Sergeant Lincoln and Privates Carter and Wilkins
were on picket duty on the Port Hudson Road. Lincoln and Carter were
fired on, their horses killed and Carter badly wounded. He dragged
himself through the woods to a house where he was put into a wagon and
brought to camp. Lincoln was stripped of his equipments and let go.

The records during this period show that a soldier's life meant good
hard work--even if fighting was not going on. Battery drill, gun drill,
marching drill--all these filled the days and brought the battery to the
highest degree of efficiency. One drill consisted of flying movements,
dismounting and mounting guns and carriages, slinging guns under the
limber, etc., and was nicknamed by the boys "break-neck drill."
Accidents were rare, however. Captain Nims invented new signals for the
use of his men so that the enemy might not know what orders were being
given. Washington's Birthday was observed by a grand artillery review by
Captain Closson, chief of artillery, and by raising a large flag across
the camp ground.

The most important duty entrusted to General Banks at this time was an
advance up the Mississippi against Port Hudson, coöperating with Grant
in his movement against Vicksburg. Bank's force, however, was not strong
enough to carry the works and he therefore turned his attention to
reducing the fortification by other means.

Port Hudson drew its supplies mainly from Western Louisiana and Texas by
way of the Red River.[8] If this river could be reached and held, these
supplies could be cut off and communication could be opened with Grant
near Vicksburg. The Confederates held Alexandria as their chief point of
defense but they extended their outposts as far as the railroad from New
Orleans to Brashear City. Another earthwork known as Fort Bisland was on
the Bayou Teche and reached to the swamps south of the bayou. All this
territory for 50 miles west of the Mississippi is an impassable network
of swamps and lakes, but there is a road from Brashear City to
Alexandria and along this road lay the line of advance to Red River.
Early in January expeditions had been organized for the purpose of
moving up Red River but it had been found impossible to make a way
through the swamps and bayous, and it was thought necessary to abandon
the project. About this time information was received that the
Confederates had captured on Red River the ram _Queen of the West_, and
the gunboat _De Soto_ which had run past the batteries at Vicksburg and
descended the river.

Footnote 8:

  See The Mississippi; F. V. Greene.

Farragut determined at once to patrol the river above Port Hudson with
his vessels and requested Banks to make a demonstration against the
fortification while he ran past the batteries.

Banks having assembled his forces at Baton Rouge, on March 13 the whole
force broke camp and marched toward Port Hudson, the right and center
sections with the divisions of Generals Grover and Emery on the Port
Hudson Road and the left with General Auger's division on the Clinton
Road. The next day Farragut with his fleet started up the river. The
land forces did not get near enough to the works to use their artillery
very effectively, though one section of the 2d Massachusetts was sent
within shelling distance of the Confederate works and fired 50 round of
shell into them.

We quote the following from an article in the Boston _Journal_ written
by C. B. Maxwell.

"The army having halted and camped for the night the sergeants of the
first and third detachments came to our quarters and quietly told the
drivers and cannoneers not to 'turn in.' 'You will be wanted before
midnight,' they said. 'We are going out on the road and we may have some
fun.' So about 10 P. M. we were told in whispers to 'hitch up.' When all
was ready, the section moved out giving the rest of the battery the
'grand sneak' as it were. Lieutenant Marland was in command I think.
Well, we arrived at a certain point on the road and having passed
through the woods were ordered to halt, unlimber and go into battery.
Said the lieutenant to the guide: 'Where is Port Hudson?' 'Right ober
dar,' was the reply. 'Which way is that?' 'Right ober dat away.' 'How
far is it?' 'Oh right smart aways. I done walk plumb down to de ribber
from break o'day to sun-up.'

"The gunners elevated the pieces and each fired a few shots, after which
all was still and dark as before. The only loud words spoken were the
lieutenant's when he shouted: 'How do you like that.' Echo answered,
'Where are we at?' Then we limbered up, thinking of our tents and stole
away back to camp and turned in. In the morning orders to hitch up were
received and the column was soon on the march to Baton Rouge. So we
claim that Nims' Battery fired the first shot at Port Hudson."

Meanwhile Farragut advanced with his fleet amid a perfect deluge of shot
and shell. Two of his ships, the _Hartford_ and the _Albatross_ were
able to pass the batteries, but all the others were sunk or disabled.
Although so many met with disaster, Farragut's purpose was fully
accomplished, for the Red River route was hence forward completely
blockaded--a most important object at that time.

As the object of Banks' land expedition had been solely for the purpose
of making a demonstration while the fleet was en route he immediately
returned with his forces to Baton Rouge. He himself went on to New
Orleans, leaving orders that another attempt be made to resume the
movement to Brashear City.

[Illustration: Landing of Federal Troops from Transport Laurel Hill.]

Accordingly, on the 27th of March the command was taken by transport
_Laurel Hill_ to Donaldsonville, whence it marched over-land to Brashear
City, the trip beginning the 31st and ending the 9th of April. On this
march the battery formed a part of the 2d Brigade, Colonel Kimball, in
General Grover's division. Here it united with the rest of the Army of
the Gulf for operations against the enemy who were threatening New
Orleans from the rear, the whole numbering about 17,000 men.

On the morning of the 11th of April the battery with General Grover's
division started from Brashear City and proceeded up the Atchafalaya
River.[9] The intention of this expedition was to get in the rear of the
enemy and either attack them there or cut off their retreat. The
grounding of one of the transports at the entrance of Grand Lake delayed
the troops for twenty-four hours but on the 13th a landing was made
opposite Madame Porter's plantation thirty miles from Brashear City.
While effecting a landing about 250 Confederates with two pieces of
artillery opened fire and a sharp skirmish ensued in which the Union men
took quite a number of prisoners.

Footnote 9:

  See Off. Record, Vol. 15, Report General Grover.

The next day, shortly after daylight, the division again advanced and
early in the morning met a strong force of the enemy at Irish Bend, a
sharp bend in the Teche. Here a battle took place and after two hours'
fighting the enemy was obliged to retreat leaving many dead on the field
and about 100 prisoners. For the next few days an advance was made,
constant skirmishing going on all the while until on April 17 we find
the battery at New Iberia. Here the left section under Lieutenant Snow,
together with three regiments marched twelve miles farther to Avery's
Island, destroyed the famous salt works there and captured a large
number of horses. The destruction of these salt works was a very
important measure, as from them the Confederates had been able to obtain
thousands of pounds of salt, thus making them independent of the United
States or England.

The next morning the march was renewed, Generals Emery and Weitzel on
the Bayou Road, General Grover on the other. At Vermillion Bayou the
enemy, who was only a short distance in advance, massed in a strong
position on the opposite bank, fired on the Union troops from the woods,
opening with artillery. Nims' Battery and Battery L of the regulars
joined in the artillery duel, forcing the enemy to retire, but not until
they had burned the bridge over the bayou. The next day the bridge was
rebuilt and the advance continued until on April 20 Opelousas was
reached.

While here orders were read from General Banks giving the troops much
credit for capturing over 2000 prisoners, 10 guns, assisting in the
destruction of two gunboats and two transports, the salt works and one
fort and also in seizing a large quantity of arms and equipments, sugar,
cotton, molasses, mules, horses, etc.

At this time, too, one section of the battery under Lieutenant Snow was
detached from the main body and for about a month served under Colonel
Chickering in connection with the 5th Massachusetts, 41st Massachusetts,
4th Maine, and a New York regiment. The work done is summarized as
follows: "There was collected and sent to New Orleans via Brashear
upward of 6000 bales of cotton, large quantities of sugar, molasses, and
other products and at least 10,000 contrabands, men, women, and children
to work in the government plantations in LaFourche Co." Irwin says: "The
column covered in the march the long train that stretched out for eight
miles over the prairies with a motley band of negroes, horses, and
beeves for a cumbrous accompaniment. With the possible exception of the
horde that set out to follow Sherman's march to the sea, this was the
most curious column ever put in motion since that which defiled after
Noah into the ark."[10]

Footnote 10:

  Nineteenth Army Corps, p. 136.

On April 22 the right and left sections with the First Brigade, General
Dwight, pushed forward through Washington to the Tableau River where
they rebuilt a bridge which had been burned. During the day there was a
slight skirmish with the cavalry. In C. B. Maxwell's diary we read: "Our
battery with General Dwight's Brigade. Joe Knowlton and I crossed river
to plantation owned by a widow and obtained some milk and two dozen
eggs. Just then the enemy's force fired on our cavalry pickets, killing
one and wounding several. Joe and I started on double quick each with
one dozen eggs in a handkerchief. Reached camp without losing or
breaking one!"

On the 4th of May the whole army started for Alexandria. "Captain Dwight
of General Banks' staff rode past the brigade with orders and when just
in front of the battery he was fired on from across the bayou and
killed. A company of cavalry was sent out in pursuit and succeeded in
capturing the man who committed the deed. Three days later he was
brought before the brigade and shot."

May 12 Alexandria was reached and after a few days' rest a start was
made for Port Hudson by way of Simsport and Bayou Sara.

Port Hudson was situated on a high bluff on the east side of the
Mississippi at a sharp bend. Its fortifications were arranged for
defense, the parapets averaging a thickness of 20 feet and the depth of
the ditch below the parapet being not less than 15 feet. Below the
landing known as Hickey's were the first batteries, on a bluff about 40
feet above high-water mark. Three series of batteries extended along the
river for a continuous line of three miles. Above the creek was an
impassable marsh. From the lower battery ran a line of land
fortifications semi-circular in form and about ten miles in extent.[11]

Footnote 11:

  See Lossing's History of Civil War.

The Confederate forces numbered probably about 7000, the Union forces
something over 30,000. General Banks' troops were commanded by Generals
Weitzel, Auger, Grover, and T. W. Sherman, while the Confederate
garrison was under Gen. Frank T. Gardner.

The following extracts will show how the battery was engaged for the
next few weeks.

May 24. Arrived at Bayou Sara at 3 A. M. Marched 13 miles toward Port
Hudson. General Grover's division took first line of rifle pits. Army
then formed around Port Hudson with Generals Weitzel and Paine on right,
General Grover and Colonel Dudley in center and Generals Auger and T. W.
Sherman on the left. The artillery brigade under command of General
Arnold.

May 25. Battery ordered to relieve Battery L at the front.

May 26. At noon both sections fell back a half mile and went into camp
to rest the horses, they having been in harness four days and four
nights.

Banks was informed that the Confederates were withdrawing from the post
and accordingly orders were given for a general assault. On the morning
of May 27 the artillery opened upon the garrison, and continued firing
all day. The infantry and navy joined in the attack. One section of the
battery advanced to within 700 yards of the enemy's works and silenced
two of their guns, but were in turn silenced by the enemy. The whole
assault was a disastrous failure, the Union loss being 293 killed and
1549 wounded. The next morning under a flag of truce there was a
cessation of hostilities until afternoon in order to take away the dead
and wounded. "During this intermission of hostilities the better part of
our natures asserted itself, the Blue and the Grey mingled, and over the
works they exchanged coffee, tobacco, bread and even souvenirs, and
asked information of each other: as the time drew near for the opening
of hostilities we parted as friends, cautioning each other to lie low
and so escape each other's bullets. As I saw all this I felt that God
must have a long hard lesson for us to learn that it was needful that
men should take each other's lives in cold blood." _Capt. E. K.
Russell._

Day after day the cannon shelled the works disabling many of the enemy's
guns and wearing down the men with fatigue and watching.

Nims' Battery was on the field almost constantly. In the diary from
which we have already quoted we read: "Remained in position all day and
all night--lead from sharp shooters falling thick around us, relieved at
7 P. M. the next day," and again: "Our section at the front all day and
night,--kept one battery silent," and still again, "Stretchers are
constantly at work bringing in our wounded." "Keep up fire day and
night." "First section under Lieutenant Hall start out with brigade of
cavalry under General Grierson,--engage in battle near Clinton. Cavalry
out of ammunition--obliged to retreat to avoid capture, reached camp
after march of 50 miles." At this time the center section which had been
at Barry's Landing for some weeks arrived at Port Hudson bringing with
them four recruits from Boston.

The position of the little Union army, which did not number now more
than 12,000 men, was becoming critical, hemmed in as it was by intensely
hostile inhabitants, and the commander felt the need of a speedy
reduction of the post. Accordingly on June 13 a general bombardment of
two hours took place, and at 12.30 General Banks sent in a flag of truce
calling for the surrender of the fort. General Gardner's reply was:
"Under the present circumstances, I am unable to surrender." When this
answer was received, arrangements were made for a grand storming on June
14. "The program of storming was sent by General Paine to all the
officers in his command, that each might know the duty he had to
perform, and was as follows: The 8th New Hampshire and 4th Wisconsin
regiments were to act as skirmishers in the advance, followed three
yards in the rear by the 4th Massachusetts and 110th New York with
grenades which were to be thrown over, the instant the skirmishers
gained the top of the works. Next in line was the 31st Massachusetts,
each man carrying two bags of cotton to be thrown into the ditch, in
order to make a road for the artillery. Then the 3d, 2d, and 1st
brigades followed by Nims' Battery. At 3 A. M. the line was formed and
the march begun. When within 20 yards of the Fort and under a heavy
cross fire the order was given, clear and distinct: 'Charge!' and after
a long hard struggle the skirmishers gained the top of the works. Here
they found bayonets and guns presented to their breasts, the enemy at
the same time shouting: 'Surrender or die.' The brave soldiers looked
around for their support but it had failed them, and forty brave boys
had to surrender as prisoners. We remained all day under a heavy fire
from the enemy and at 9 o'clock withdrew from the field having gained
nothing." _Knowlton's diary._

General Paine was wounded early in the attack, a ball shattering his
leg. He was forced to remain on the field for twelve hours under a heavy
fire, while hundreds of others were in like condition for twenty-four or
thirty-six hours, until under a flag of truce they were brought forward
by the enemy, who would not allow the Union troops to come near their
fortifications. "It would not be just to allow this record to become
history without mentioning the valor displayed by some of the colored
troops engaged with us on that occasion. After the assault had failed,
and the ground in our front was strewn with our wounded comrades, these
colored soldiers could be seen by twos crawling on their knees dragging
after them a stretcher and on reaching a wounded soldier would roll him
upon the stretcher, then, after a moment's rest, they would arise
quickly and make a dash for a shelter from the shower of lead that was
sure to fall around them." _E. K. Russell._

On the 16th General Banks issued an order for a thousand stormers,
offering medals to the soldiers and promotions to the officers, and
preparations were making for a third assault when on July 7 came the
news of the surrender of Vicksburg. This put an end to the hopes of the
Confederacy, and two days later Port Hudson surrendered, 6408 becoming
prisoners of war. In addition to the important post the spoils of
victory included two steamers, 51 pieces of artillery, 5000 small arms
and a large quantity of ammunition.

Most important of all, the fall of these two strongholds gave free
navigation of the Mississippi, or in the words of Lincoln: "The Father
of Waters goes unvexed to the sea."

Among other services rendered by Nims' Battery in this siege it is
claimed that one of her guns had the honor of firing the last shot at
Port Hudson and also receiving the last shot from that same fort. We
have already told how it fired the first shot at this place.

We quote from the story as told by C. B. Maxwell.

"During the siege of Port Hudson and on the occasion of one of the many
assaults on the fortifications by the Federal army, there was captured a
young soldier, of the 165th New York Zouaves. He was a bright, active
lad, and while captive had his eyes open to chances, especially to
making his escape. Among the things he saw was a mill in the town near
the river, wherein they ground all their corn, and as that was all they
had to eat it occurred to him that it would be a misfortune to himself
as well as to the enemy if by any accident that mill should be
destroyed. So he paid closer attention then ever to getting through the
lines to reach his regiment, where rations were better both in quality
and quantity, and near the end of the siege he was successful. In
relating his experience he said of the corn mill: 'If they hadn't had
that, I should have been obliged to take my corn on the ear.'

"This having been reported to headquarters, General Banks sent for
Captain Nims and said, to him:

"'Send over a section of your battery to a point opposite and throw a
few of those percussion shells into that mill. It may weaken their power
of endurance. The soldier will go along to point out the mill. Of
course, if you draw the fire of those heavy batteries, you will retire
and report back to camp.'

"And so the first section, Lieutenant Hall commanding, made a night
march to a boat landing some miles below, where a steamboat was in
readiness 'to tote' us across. On the other side we marched up, being
protected from view of enemy by a very high levee on that side of the
river, to a point commanding a good view of the town opposite. Then all
hands went to work with shovels, which we came provided with, cutting an
embrasure and space to work a gun, thus making a good fort, as it were,
in a short time. We then hauled the gun up the slope into position. The
men not engaged in working the gun were lying on the grassy slope of the
levee watching the effect of the shell on 'the large building with a
nearly flat roof.' The zouave was reclining on his side with head and
shoulders exposed above the levee, as were the rest.

"There had been two or three shots fired when Lieutenant Hall, looking
through his field glass, remarked: 'Those were good line shots, but a
little too high; just put them in on the ground floor.' Suddenly a puff
of smoke curled up from the water batteries, and a 6-inch solid shot
plowed a furrow across the top of the levee, and to our horror and
amazement instantly killed our friend the 'Zou Zou.' We retired, quietly
and quickly, after burying the body then and there making our way back
by the same route by which we came, and took our place in line with the
rest of the battery in time to march into Port Hudson, the surrender
having been made that day. Negotiations to that end were going on the
day before, while we were making the attack on the corn-mill, though of
course unknown to us."

[Illustration: Second, Fourth and Sixth Massachusetts Batteries at Baton
Rouge.]

The 10th of July the battery was ordered on board the _Laurel Hill_ for
Baton Rouge, but on reaching the wharf found the steamer already
overcrowded. Consequently orders were given to march that distance.
Accordingly with nine other batteries and the infantry it began a
tedious all night march, many of the men, who had been up for three
nights, falling asleep on their horses. At Baton Rouge transports were
taken for Donaldsonville where skirmishing was going on with a hostile
force under Dick Taylor. Before the reinforcement arrived the enemy
retreated, but as an attack was expected the right and left sections of
the battery were immediately ordered on picket duty, where they remained
for the next two days without, however, encountering the enemy.

A stay of two weeks at Donaldsonville was followed by a march to
Carrollton and then to New Orleans in company with Battery L, the 159th
New York and a large wagon train all under command of Colonel Molineaux.
This march was exceedingly trying on account of the excessive heat which
exhausted the men and killed two or three horses.

While at Donaldsonville four members of the company who had been taken
prisoners at Brashear City, while in hospital there, arrived and were
sent to New Orleans, being on parole.

The battery arrived at New Orleans on August 5, took up quarters in the
Mississippi Cotton Press, where it remained from the 6th of August to
the 17th of September.

First Lieutenant Hall having resigned, his juniors were promoted in
turn, and First Sergeant Joseph K. Greenleaf of Boston was commissioned
as junior second lieutenant. Early in October Second Lieut. Edw. K.
Russell was promoted and transferred to the 6th Massachusetts Battery,
creating a vacancy which was filled some time later by the commissioning
of First Sergeant Lucian A. Hodgdon of Somerville. At the same time
Gunner Swan was made sergeant of the 2d detachment, Corporal Ellis
gunner of the 3d detachment and Private Taylor corporal of the 2d
detachment.

During the stay in New Orleans the battery was commanded to mount as
horse or flying artillery and to join the cavalry division of the 19th
Army Corps. Associated with them were two other batteries, one from
Missouri, and one from the regular army, and Captain Nims was appointed
Chief of Artillery of the 19th Army Corps, Col. A. L. Lee, and was made
a member of Colonel Lee's staff.

The first parade of these batteries as horse artillery (at which Nims'
Battery held the post of honor), took place September 5, and was
witnessed by Generals Banks, Arnold, Franklin and many other officers.
The following letter, a copy of which was found among Colonel Nims'
papers, is a proof of their high opinion of this new organization.

    OFFICE, CHIEF OF ARTILLERY.

    HD. QRS. DEPT. OF THE GULF,

    NEW ORLEANS, September 7, 1863.

    CAPT. O. F. NIMS,

    _Chief of Artillery, 19th Army Corps_.

    SIR:--

    It becomes my great pleasure to communicate to yourself and the
    batteries under your command on the 5th inst., the high commendation
    of the Commanding General of the Department of the Gulf and the
    Adjutant General of the United States Army. They were pleased to
    express the belief that _no_ artillery in the service could be more
    thorough in their equipments and general appointments.

    Please communicate the above to each battery commander.

    Your ob'd't servant
    Very respectfully,
    RICHARD ARNOLD.
    _Brig. Gen. and Chief of Artillery._

On the 17th of September another movement began toward the interior of
Louisiana. The object of this entire movement was to divert the enemy
from Banks' expedition into Texas which he was about to undertake.
Accordingly he ordered the command of which the battery was a part to
advance under Gen. C. C. Washburne from Brashear City to Opelousas, to
give the impression that a march to Alexandria or Shreveport was begun.
The battery left New Orleans on September 18 and the next day reached
Brashear City, which had been evacuated by the Confederates in July
after securing about 1000 prisoners together with supplies valued at
$2,000,000. A week later an advance was made to Bisland and then on to
Opelousas, which was reached October 24. All along the advance,
skirmishing and fighting occurred almost every day, and in it all the
battery did its part most creditably. At Indian Bend, October 2, the
left and center divisions, which were in the advance, met the enemy and
drove them back. Two days later at Vermillion Bayou the same sections
forced the enemy once more to fall back. Again the right section at
Vermillion Bayou contended with the enemy for a ford for over three
hours, driving them completely from their position. Again we read in our
diaries: "The right and center moved forward with the advance cavalry
came in sight of the enemy's camp. They retired leaving for us a good
dinner of beef steak, sweet potatoes, and corn cake all piping hot.
Pieces of our shell picked up near camp fires about two miles away." Two
days later,--"Just at dusk, the enemy advanced on our pickets. A section
of the battery was sent for, hitched up with a will, crossed the plains
on a gallop and in 18 minutes from the time the first order was given we
had gained the distance and commenced firing. Time taken by Colonel
Molineaux."

October 15. "The enemy came out on the open plain, drew themselves up in
line of battle and commenced firing on our pickets. This battery was
ordered to the front at double quick and at 7 A. M. we were at the
extreme advance--we opened a heavy fire which caused them to break for
the woods. At 9 A. M. Captain Simmes' Battery opened on us from a masked
position--we dismounted one gun and exploded their ammunition chest
forcing them to retreat. A piece of one of our shells cut off the head
of one, passed through another and killed his horse--deadly work."

October 21. "6 A. M. whole force moved forward, the battery with advance
cavalry. At 7 A. M. met the enemy in line of battle. Right section with
cavalry engaged left flank while remaining section engaged them in
front. We succeeded in driving them back on the flank and then in front
and they retreated in disorder. Our troops followed to Opelousas when
right section with cavalry branched off to Barry's Landing and went into
camp after a hard march over ditches, through corn field, etc. October
28. A running fight for 17 miles. Center section with Grover's division
at Opelousas."

And so it goes day after day till Opelousas is reached, and on November
1 a retrograde movement is ordered. Here again we find the battery in
the post of danger, acting often as rear guard, skirmishing with the
enemy.

Under the date of November 2 we read: "7 A. M. enemy fired on our
pickets. Section ordered on the double quick to the front about a half
mile away. We opened fire and after a short skirmish drove them four
miles and then fell back slowly across the plain to draw them into a
fight. They followed and when within short range we opened on them with
shell which broke up their line. We pursued them again till 4 P. M. when
we gave up the chase and returned to camp. Generals Washburne and
Burbridge were with us during the engagement and gave us much credit."
This battle is known as that of Carrion Crow Bayou.

The next day, November 3, marks another occasion when the battery won
especial honor for itself, and as we read in General Burbridge's
report--"did more than its whole duty."[12]

Footnote 12:

  Off. Records, Vol. 26, p. 361.

At Grand Coteau, the Confederate forces including cavalry and
artillery--about 5500 in number, under General Greene--surprised the
camp and nearly captured it. The right under General Burbridge on whom
the weight of the attack fell was almost surrounded and ruin seemed
inevitable. The section of the battery under Lieutenant Marland was
attacked, the enemy being in so short range that the guns could not be
brought into action, and while part were endeavoring to work the guns
others were harnessing the horses. A desperate conflict ensued, the guns
keeping up a heavy fire. Regiment after regiment of infantry was brought
up as support but gave way until the battery was almost surrounded. It
was at last obliged to fall back, the cannoneers fighting their way with
their revolvers; but bringing off their guns in triumph. Before they had
retreated far they saw coming to their aid on the double quick General
Cameron's Brigade of the 13th Corps. They immediately halted, got their
guns in position and renewed the conflict, chasing the enemy back four
miles, and securing thus a Union victory. When General Franklin was told
of this experience he said, "If there is ever another opportunity of
racing a section of Nims' Battery give it your two best regiments for
support, for it is the finest battery in the United States." One
historian in relating this incident says, "Nims' Battery saved the day."

The following is the official report of Lieutenant Marland as given in
Official Records, Vol. 26, p. 371.

    BAYOU BOURBEAU,
    CARRION CROW BAYOU.

    "In pursuance to your orders I have the honor to make the following
    report of the part taken in the action at this place on the 3rd of
    November by the section under my command.

    "In obedience to orders received on the evening of the 2d of
    November I harnessed up at 4 A. M. on the 3rd, remaining so until 11
    A. M. when I was ordered to unharness--the pickets firing all the
    while.

    "At about 11.45 P. M. the firing became general. Hearing the cavalry
    buglers blow Boots and Saddles, I began to harness up on my own
    responsibility and was attacked in camp before I could get
    harnessed. The enemy being within 400 yards of me I opened on them
    with canister and percussion shell which checked their advance and
    drove them to the right. I limbered to the front and advanced to the
    fork of the road which is about 100 yards. Went into battery and
    fired a few shot until my support all had left me. Finding it too
    warm, I limbered to the rear and moved 300 yards. Finding the enemy
    in my rear and on the right, I fired to the right about 50 shot and
    was charged on three sides. A regiment came up on my left as
    support, fired one volley and left. The enemy then opened two pieces
    of artillery on me at about 300 yards killing one horse and
    disabling one caisson wheel. The cavalry still advancing and no
    infantry to be seen I limbered up and started for the woods. Here I
    ordered my cannoneers to draw their revolvers and had quite a brisk
    fight. Had another horse killed, and two men missing. Went through
    the woods the enemy coming out in rear and front of men. As the
    bridges were held by the enemy, it was necessary to charge through,
    which was accomplished, without loss. I came up to the 46th Indiana
    and formed on their right. Colonel Bringhurst told me he would
    support me and I went back through the woods with General Cameron's
    command, driving the enemy in disorder who left dead and wounded on
    the field. I then returned to camp with General Cameron's Brigade.

    "I am sir, very respectfully,

    "Your most ob't servant,

    "WM. MARLAND,
    "_1st Lieut. Com. Sec._

    "BRIG. GEN. RICHARD ARNOLD,
    "_Chief of Artillery. Dept. Gulf_."

We also quote from Major General C. C. Washburne,

"The bringing off of the section of Nims' Battery, after the regiment
sent to its support had surrendered, extorted the admiration of every
beholder."[13]

Footnote 13:

  Off. Records, Vol. 26, p. 358.

In this engagement Sergeant Burwell and Private Smith were taken
prisoners, while three horses were killed, seven wounded and the gun
carriages damaged somewhat.

The entire battery was brought together at Vermillion River and on
November 2 it took a prominent part in the engagement at that
point,--maintaining a brisk artillery duel with the enemy and after two
hours hard fighting and firing 120 shell it succeeded in driving them
from the field.

We quote from the diary of W. G. Hidden:

"Right and left sections with 1300 infantry and cavalry, all under
General Lee, started at 5 A. M. on the Opelousas Road, met the enemy's
pickets one mile out and drove them before us. At 10 A. M. we arrived at
the edge of a plain and saw the enemy drawn up in line of battle about
two miles distant. The right section was ordered into position and fired
twenty shell, causing them to disclose their whole force of about 6000.
General Lee then ordered a retreat. Arriving at a plain outside the
town, we found a brigade of infantry with 4th Massachusetts Battery
lying low in the bushes. We moved our guns into the bushes just high
enough to conceal us from the enemy and waited. They soon formed a line
of battle about 1000 yards in front. Right section opened fire and the
first charge emptied fifteen saddles. Their cavalry then charged on our
left. Left section engaged them while we engaged the front. Cavalry was
forced to retreat. Their artillery having got into position, opened fire
on us and did some fine shooting. Their shells burst all around us
plowing the ground and killing some of our infantry, but our men escaped
injury. After two hours fighting the enemy retreated and we returned to
camp. This is called The Artillery Skirmish at Vermillionville."

On November 16 the entire force started for New Iberia, the battery
acting as rear guard and burning the bridge across the river after all
were over. One writes: "It was a splendid sight to see the army
form,--each part separate, and then unite to form a line and move off
over the prairie with bands playing." The next day New Iberia was
reached and preparations were made for the winter. At the same time
skirmishing was going on and many prisoners were taken. We read: "A
small rebel force known as Camp Pratt was six miles out. At 1 A. M. the
center section started out on one road to get in its rear. At 4 A. M.
the right section with cavalry and part of Cameron's Brigade of the 13th
Corps started on another road for the same point. Arriving at daybreak
all made an attack on the camp and captured 175 out of 200--twelve of
these being officers. While marching them into town two bands came to
meet us. One was placed in front, the other in the rear of the
prisoners, and so we marched through the town to the tune of our
national airs."

About this time Lieutenant Slack of Chelsea of the 13th Massachusetts
was placed in command of the left section of the battery in the absence
of Lieutenant Snow, who had gone North for recruits. Christmas Day, by
exchange of prisoners, Sergeant Burwell and Private Smith, who had been
taken at Grand Coteau November 3 were returned to the battery. "They
were ragged and dirty, having had a hard time."

The month of December was devoted largely to drilling. Recruits kept
coming in and these had to be made into soldiers. Captain Nims
instituted a new set of bugle calls, making in all twenty-eight calls a
day. January 1, 1864, was the coldest day the men had experienced since
leaving home. Snow and rain made camp life uninviting and difficult.
Nevertheless reënlistments were in order, and at this time several of
the boys entered upon another three years' service.

Early in the year the force was moved out to Franklin, half way to
Brashear City, and there made winter quarters. The roads thither were in
terrible condition--deep with mud and water with a frozen crust on top,
and three days were required to travel a distance of 23 miles. The
horses were in poor condition from lack of hay and grain and only a
limited supply of corn, and five died from exhaustion on this short
trip. Here three months were spent in camp, the men taking possession of
the cabins formerly occupied by the negroes, who had long since gone to
the contraband camp in New Orleans. Much time was given to the drilling
of recruits, while about 25 of the men who had reënlisted were given
furloughs of 30 days.

A copy of the program of an evening's entertainment at the Cooper
Institute (an old cooper's shop fitted up) will doubtless recall
pleasant memories of camp life the winter of '63-'64.

    COOPER'S INSTITUTE

    FRANKLIN, LA.

    A Grand Entertainment wilt be given at the above place on Friday,
    March 4, 1864, by the members of Nims' Battery, under the direction
    of the following committee: A. B. Burwell, President; J. F.
    Robertson, Secretary; C. B. Maxwell, Manager.

    COMMITTEE

    W. Kane, L. W. Swan, A. N. Norcross, C. Dubois, W. D. Butts, D.
    Murray, J. S. Knowlton, H. T. Bates and W. G. Hidden.

    The committee take great pleasure in announcing to their friends,
    that the following distinguished Artists have generously volunteered
    their services. A sufficient number of Special Police will be in
    attendance to enforce good order.

    Music by Knowlton and Co.'s Military Band.

    Doors open at 6: commence at 7: terminate at 10.

    Carriages ordered at half-past 9.

    PROGRAM

     Grand Introductory Overture                              Band

     Jig Dance                                          J. Comfort

     Sabre Exercise                                     Dubois and
                                                        DeFlanders

     Sparring                                 Flemming and Ferrari

     Song, The Sword of Bunker Hill                       Mr. Wren

     Dramatic Readings                                     McGrath

     Feet Sparring                                      Dubois and
                                                        DeFlanders

     Song, What a Row de dow                              T. Kenny

     Sparring                                   Mortimer and Baker

     A Little Spouting                          Wilkinson and Ward

     Cane Exercise                                      Dubois and
                                                        DeFlanders

     Song, Virginia Rosebud                         J. S. Knowlton

     Sparring                                    Ellis and Comfort

     Magic Rings                                     C. B. Maxwell

     Song, How are you, Jeff Davis?                       T. Kenny

     Originality                                          Mr. Ward

     Sabre Exercise                                     Dubois and
                                                        DeFlanders

     Jig Dance                                           Mr. Brady

     Dramatic Readings                                     McGrath

     Sparring                                    Connors and Baker

     Song, Faded Flowers                            J. S. Knowlton

     Feet Sparring                              Dubois and LeClair

     Jig Dance                                          Mr. Connor

     Song                                              By the Band

     Bayonet Exercise                                    C. Dubois

     Sparring                                 Sullivan and Raymond

     Song, I Dream of Home                          J. S. Knowlton

     Fancy Dance                                         C. Dubois

     Sparring                                    McGrath and Baker

     Grand Walk Around                          Comfort, Kenny and
                                                           Connors

     Song, The Cove what Sprouts                        B. Connors

     Sparring                                 Mortimer and Connors

Similar entertainments followed and were always given to crowded houses.

On February 7 Lieutenant Russell received appointment as first
lieutenant in the 6th Massachusetts Battery where he later received
promotion to the rank of captain. During the same month about seventy
recruits arrived from Massachusetts, so that drilling appears again as
the order of the day. Nor was this time wasted, for it was evident that
an army movement was soon to take place.

Early in March preparations were made for the Red River campaign, the
object of which was the capture of Shreveport on the Red River, the
dispersion of the Confederates in that region and ultimately the
recovery of Texas by the line of the Red River. There were serious
objections to this route and certain precautionary measures were
necessary if the end were to be accomplished, but these were not carried
into execution.

As the battery was not brigaded we find it first in one division then
another, wherever there was difficult service and danger to be
encountered.

The general plan was that Banks with all the forces at his command
should march his troops over-land to Alexandria, there to be joined by
Gen. A. J. Smith with a force of about 10,000 men, detached from
Sherman's army, who were to be transported up the river in company with
Admiral Porter's fleet. At the same time it was expected that General
Steele would coöperate in the movement with a force of about 15,000 men.
As General Banks was obliged to be in New Orleans at this time the
arrangements for his part of the movement were entrusted to General
Franklin.

General Franklin's forces consisted of the entire 19th Army Corps and
the 3d and 4th divisions of the 13th Army Corps, in command of General
Ransom, the whole force numbering some 16,000, all under Major General
Franklin. The cavalry division of the 19th Army Corps was commanded by
Gen. A. L. Lee, and to this division Nims' Battery, equipped as horse
artillery, had been assigned.

The troops were supposed to start from Franklin on the 7th of March and
arrive at Alexandria the 13th, but owing to some delay they were unable
to leave until the 13th. On that day General Lee moved with his command
in advance of the regular army. His force consisted of the 1st, 3d, 4th
and 5th brigades of the cavalry division, Nims' Battery of 6
guns--Rawles' Battery of 4 guns--and a battery of mountain howitzers
manned by a company of 6th Missouri Cavalry, all equipped as horse
artillery, a total of about 3300. There was a halt the next morning at
five for an hour's rest and then on again. Long trying marches followed,
23 miles one day, 30 the next, 20 the next, 30 the next until the 19th
of March, when 33 miles were made in 12 hours. Although one section of
the battery reached Alexandria the 19th and another the 21st, the whole
column did not arrive before the 25th. Here General Banks again assumed
command and three days were spent in resting, refitting, and issuing
supplies.

It had been intended to carry supplies the whole distance in the attack
on Shreveport by water, but the river was so low that not many of the
transports could pass and it was found necessary to establish a supply
station at Alexandria, and a wagon train to take supplies from the
vessels below to vessels above the rapids. To protect this, called for a
force of about 3000 men. General Grover was placed in charge of this
post and his division left for its defense. The troops on the transport
were also unable to pass the rapids and were accordingly recalled to the
Mississippi. Consequently, General Banks found himself ready to move out
from Alexandria with a force of only about 20,000 men, while he could
not expect any coöperation from General Steele. Even at the beginning of
April experts foretold the failure of the expedition. The march into the
enemy's country began on the 28th of March, and from that time the
command was in active service. The Confederates constantly retreated,
frequently stopping to skirmish, but offering no serious resistance.

Natchitoches was reached on April 3, the cavalry division camping just
outside the town where a halt of a day or two was made. On the 6th the
march toward Shreveport was begun at daylight, the battery marching in
the center of the division as reserve artillery. In addition to the
troops there was a train of 200 wagons carrying ten days' rations for
the men, three days' forage, ammunition, and camp equipage. General
Lee's orders from General Franklin were "to attack the enemy wherever he
could be found but not to bring on a general engagement." No enemy was
seen that day. The next morning the march was renewed until on reaching
Wilson's Farm, three miles from Pleasant Hill, a considerable
Confederate force was found posted in the woods on a hill. An engagement
ensued between the enemy and the third brigade with two sections of the
Missouri and Illinois batteries. The resistance was so strong that the
1st Brigade was advanced as support, and with this, two sections of
Nims' Battery. Owing to the dense woods the battery, although at the
front, could not go into action and was ordered into position with the
4th Brigade, Colonel Dudley, in line of battle in the rear. With the aid
of the reinforcements the enemy was forced to retreat slowly and Colonel
Lee and his forces bivouacked five miles beyond the battlefield.

The next day came the terrible experience of Sabine Cross Roads or
Mansfield as it is sometimes called, where the battery met with disaster
for the first time.

On that day, April 8, the battery started in the advance--with the 1st
Brigade, under Colonel Lucas, and a Brigade of the 4th division of the
13th Army Corps, Colonel Landram commanding, which had been sent forward
during the night. Following this came the 4th Brigade Cavalry, Colonel
Dudley in command, and then the 5th Brigade, under Colonel Robinson, in
charge of the long wagon train and the artillery which was not in the
front. By noon an advance had been made of about ten miles, the enemy
contesting every foot of the way. The woods on each side of the road
were very dense, which made it difficult to move in line and the
marching was tedious and tiring to the men. Almost no water was to be
found. At this time General Ransom arrived with the 2d Brigade of the
13th Army Corps to relieve the 1st Brigade of its duty.

About four miles from Mansfield the road ran through a clearing in front
of a hill of considerable height where the timber was not quite so thick
as it had been elsewhere. This point was chosen as the scene of the
engagement. A description of the arrangement of troops may be taken from
Colonel Lee's report:[14]

Footnote 14:

  Off. Rec., Vol. 34 p. 451.

"Two regiments of the 4th Brigade Cavalry, Colonel Dudley, were placed
on the flank, deployed in the woods. The Second Illinois Cavalry formed
a half mile in rear of the first line. Nims' Battery was placed in
position at the crest of the hill, in and to the right and left of the
road. A section of the Sixth Missouri Howitzer was placed at its left. A
brigade of infantry was placed in the front, one regiment to the left of
Nims' Battery, the others to the right. A second brigade was placed on
our right flank, facing the enemy who appeared in that direction. The
First Brigade Cavalry, Col. T. J. Lucas commanding, was placed on the
extreme right of the line and fought dismounted. With this brigade was a
section of the 6th Missouri Howitzer Battery and a section of Rawles'
Battery. The Third Brigade was in the rear escorting the train which was
halted a mile and a half from our front."

About 1 P. M. General Banks and his staff arrived and General Lee
reported to him the arrangements of his troops and the apparent position
and strength of the enemy and his opinion that the army must either fall
back or be reinforced by infantry. General Banks gave orders that the
position should be maintained and at the same time sent to General
Franklin to hurry forward the infantry.

About 4.30 the enemy, made a general attack in front and right flank,
driving infantry and cavalry back to the line where the battery was
stationed. The guns of the battery were being fired as rapidly as
possible with double charges of canister, and although many of the men
were recruits, having had no experience under fire, every one of them
stood up to his work as bravely as the veterans.

When, however, the infantry support failed (except for the 23d Wisconsin
and 19th Kentucky), orders were given to retire in order that the guns
might not fall into the hands of the enemy. Three of the guns had to be
left on the field as the horses had been killed. At the foot of the hill
a stand was made, but the rout had become so general that the battery
could not maintain its position and was almost surrounded by the enemy.
Orders were therefore given to retreat.

About a mile from the battlefield was the wagon train of the cavalry
division, which had become blocked in the ruts and mud and entirely
obstructed the narrow road.

The road was so obstructed at this point and the rush of retreating
forces so great that it became necessary to abandon the remaining three
guns, together with caissons, baggage-wagons, battery wagon and forges.

To account for the position of the cavalry train we quote from the
report[15] of Col. John G. Chandler, acting chief quarter-master.

Footnote 15:

  Off. Rec., Vol. 34 p. 238.

"Both General Franklin and General Lee wanted the cavalry train to move
in the rear of the infantry force, but they disagreed as to the
precedence of position when the trains should be joined. General Lee
desired that his train should precede General Franklin's infantry train,
and the latter insisted that the infantry trains should move in the rear
of the infantry force. Because of this disagreement no change was made
on the day of the engagement."

We give here an account of the engagement as taken from the records of
C. B. Maxwell and J. S. Knowlton:

"At 6 A. M. we started for the advance, marched three miles and came
upon a large force of the enemy under Dick Taylor. Two brigades of the
13th Army Corps were sent to us as reinforcements and formed a line of
battle, acting as skirmishers. The enemy commenced slowly falling back
but closely contending every inch of ground, and in this way we drove
them ten miles. At Sabine Cross Roads the enemy made a stand in the
woods before which was a clearing of some 75 acres where our cavalry
manoeuvred. The enemy was very strongly reinforced at this point. At the
extreme front was a hill 50 yards in diameter upon which our six guns
were placed. The 4th Brigade of cavalry was on our left with two of the
6th Missouri Howitzers.

"About three o'clock General Banks and his staff arrived. General Lee,
on seeing General Banks dismount, saluted and said: 'I am confident,
General, that we have a powerful force in front and if we make the
attack I am confident we shall be repulsed.' General Banks made no
reply, but it was noticed he looked serious. All the staff officers with
those of General Lee were sent hurriedly to right, left and rear. About
4 P. M. General Banks' chief of staff rode along our left to where the
third piece stood and said to me (Maxwell), 'Call your men, load your
gun and point it down the road. If you see anyone crossing where the
road enters the wood, open fire. Don't wait for further orders.' In less
than fifteen minutes the enemy were sneaking across the road and the
third detachment obeyed orders. The battle was on. We soon discovered
men coming out of the woods much nearer than those down the road, so we
fired to the front and right until they came to point-blank range and
then we fed it to them with double-shotted canister. Although the battle
was very severe, we received no reinforcements except the 3d division of
the 13th Corps. Owing to the superior force of the enemy, our cavalry
and infantry were driven back, leaving the hill on which our six guns
were planted with out support of 23d Wisconsin and 19th Kentucky to
fight nearly alone.

"Our guns belched forth double-shotted canister and the enemy in front,
eight deep in line, suffered terribly at each discharge. Wide gaps were
opened in their ranks but were immediately filled up again. Finally, all
the horses on three of our guns were killed, making it impossible to
remove the guns from the field. The remaining three guns being out of
ammunition retired to the foot of the hill where our caisson lay, filled
up with ammunition and went into position. By this time infantry and
cavalry had become completely routed and were fleeing to the rear. Our
officers tried to rally them but in vain. Finding it impossible to save
the guns, our officers ordered us to slip our traces and save our lives
if possible, which the men did reluctantly. Our wagon train had been
pushed forward before the engagement, completely blocking the road,
making a retreat impossible. During the night we fell back to Pleasant
Hill, a distance of 13 miles, and in the morning our company assembled
under Lieutenant Greenleaf. We had lost our guns and everything we
possessed except the clothes we had on."

The loss of the battery in this battle was very severe. Lieutenant Snow
was shot through the left lung and left on the field. Private Reardon
was killed. Lieutenant Slack was wounded, 18 men were wounded, of whom
five were taken prisoners, together with seven unwounded men. Besides
the loss of guns and caissons, 82 of the battery's horses were either
killed or wounded. In spite of the terrible defeat and loss, the battery
won great praise for its indomitable courage and for the way it handled
its guns, for we read in the report of Col. J. W. Landrum,[16] "It is
proper to say that Captain Nims' Battery displayed throughout the whole
of the fight an example of coolness and true courage unsurpassed in the
annals of history. They are entitled to highest commendation, and
although they lost their guns it is due to them to say that they could
not have prevented it, and that the damage they inflicted on the enemy
was such as to entitle them to the thanks of the whole army."

Footnote 16:

  Off. Rec. Vol. 34 p. 293.

Another quotation is from the Lacon, Ill., _Gazette_,[17] "Nims' Battery
worked manfully--the veteran battery, hero of seventeen engagements, all
successful, but doomed this time to defeat. They double charged their
guns with canister and adding a bag of bullets mowed the enemy down only
to have their places filled by the advancing hordes." Again, "Nims'
splendid battery with its honorable record on every field from Baton
Rouge to Port Hudson was taken by Walker's men." _Irwin._

Footnote 17:

  Putman's Record of the Rebellion, Vol. 8.

Brig. Gen. W. H. Emery, commanding First Division of the 19th Army
Corps, had been notified of the state of affairs and had been ordered to
advance as rapidly as possible and form a line of battle in order to
support the retreating troops and check the advance of the enemy. He
took his position at Pleasant Grove about three miles from Sabine Cross
Roads, the First Brigade, General Dwight, being placed across the road
upon which the enemy was advancing. Waiting until the enemy was within
close range they poured a tremendous volley along the whole front,
causing it to fall back. The action lasted for an hour and a half, then
darkness coming on there was a cessation of hostilities. During the
night the entire army retired to Pleasant Hill, where a battle was
fought the next day, but in which the battery naturally took no part.
The struggle, however, was desperate and sanguinary. The defeat of the
enemy was complete and their loss in officers and men more than double
that sustained by the Union forces.

It was a sorry looking company of men that gathered at Pleasant Hill the
next morning--the remnant of "the finest battery in the army." Guns,
caissons, wagon and supplies lost--nothing left but the clothes the men
wore. As for blankets, one rubber and one woolen blanket had to do for
five men, while half rations only made one all the more hungry.

The next day the remaining men were assigned to guard the ammunition
train on the retreat to Grand Ecore, which was reached on the 10th. Here
the Union army gathered its scattered battalions.

As the members of the battery were without equipment, they were ordered
to New Orleans, and on the 19th went on board the little steamer
_Meteor_, arriving at New Orleans on the 22d, where they remained until
the 10th of May. During their stay in New Orleans occurred an event
which showed the pleasant relation existing between the members of the
battery and its commander. The following quotation is taken from the New
Orleans _Era_ of April 26, 1864.

    PRESENTATION OF A SWORD TO CAPTAIN ORMAND F. NIMS, 2D MASSACHUSETTS
    LIGHT HORSE ARTILLERY

    Yesterday afternoon was the occasion of quite a little surprise
    party at the quarters of the 2d Massachusetts Light Horse Battery.
    Captain Nims was presented with a magnificent sword, sash and belt,
    by the non-commissioned officers and men who still represent the
    original members of this fine command, and who have long wished for
    an opportunity of expressing in some such manner their appreciation
    of the constant care and watchfulness for their welfare exhibited at
    all times and under all circumstances by Captain Nims, as well as to
    present a lasting memento of their respect and affection for their
    beloved commander. It was but a well-merited tribute to sterling
    worth. This splendid sword was manufactured by Tiffany & Co., of New
    York, and is one of the finest ever got up by that firm. The
    presentation speech, made by Joshua F. Robertson, was as follows:

    "Captain, I have been requested by the members of this command to
    say a few words on presenting you this token of our high esteem. It
    is now nearly three years since you took command of this battery,
    and I am confident, sir, that I express the sentiments of us all
    when I say that we have never had cause to regret, but much rather
    to rejoice, that you have commanded the 2d Massachusetts Battery.
    Your example as a soldier and a gentleman, your example on the
    battlefield and in camp, your forbearance and leniency towards us,
    your kind attention to many of us during the long and tedious hours
    of sickness, have endeared you to us by ties of friendship which we
    trust may never be forgotten. Those members of the battery who, in
    the first campaign in this Department, fell victims to disease
    contracted in the swamps opposite Vicksburg, and who now sleep
    beside the honored dead at Baton Rouge and in the cemeteries of this
    city--methinks that if our shrill morning reveille could but awake
    them, they would reiterate what I now say, that you, by your
    constant watchfulness, kindness and attention, did all that lay in
    human power to alleviate their sufferings. In asking you to accept
    this sword, we know that it will never be drawn but in the cause of
    freedom, in which we are all battling, and never will be sheathed in
    disgrace. In after years, when this wicked rebellion shall have been
    crushed, and should it be our good fortune to return with you to our
    fair New England homes, we hope this memento we now present you will
    at least serve to remind you of the pleasant associations and the
    many trying scenes through which we have passed. In conclusion, let
    me say, sir, that you will ever bear with you the best wishes of
    every man under your command, and we hope that hereafter, in what
    position soever you may be placed--whether in command of the 2d
    Massachusetts Battery or in a higher station--the same good feeling
    may exist between you and those under your command that has ever
    existed between yourself and the members of this battery."

    REPLY

    "Fellow Soldiers of the 2d Massachusetts Battery--I cannot express
    to you the feelings of surprise and astonishment with which the
    present occasion had filled me. I need not remind you that I am no
    speech maker, for you are well aware that I am a man of but few
    words. I fear, however, that you have overrated the little it has
    laid in my power to do for your comfort, welfare and efficiency. But
    of one thing, I feel conscious, gentlemen, and that is, that I have
    endeavored to do my duty by you, by my country, and by myself. Rest
    assured that I shall ever look upon the present as one of the
    happiest moments of my life, and that your highly prized gift shall
    never be drawn but in the cause of freedom and of our common
    country. Accept, gentlemen, my sincere and heartfelt thanks."

    The boys dispersed to their quarters with six rousing cheers for
    Captain Nims, who, truth to say, was almost overpowered by his
    feelings, so completely was he taken by surprise.

    We also quote the Special Order No. 1 issued April 28, as still
    further indicating the honor given to the battery by commander and
    other officers.

    SPECIAL ORDER NO. 1

    "The commandant takes this method of congratulating his command upon
    the part which they took in the engagement at Sabine Cross Roads,
    La., on the 8th inst., and of thanking them not only for himself,
    but also in behalf of the general commanding the division, and the
    general commanding in the field, for the gallantry, courage, and
    efficiency with which you conducted yourselves in the trying
    position in which you were placed. Although it has been your
    misfortune to lose your guns, it is gratifying to know that it was
    through no dereliction or shortcoming on your part; having done all
    that lay in your power as brave men to do. We must submit to the
    misfortune with the best grace we may. Your commandant would also
    express his satisfaction at the sorrow exhibited on all hands at
    your misfortune, by officers of every grade in the service as well
    as by civilians, which tends to show in a clearer light the golden
    opinions you have won on all hands. Your commandant is proud not
    only at the battle of Sabine Cross Roads but in every other battle
    in which you have been engaged. He gives the credit all to you, and
    hopes you will continue to deserve the high encomiums so universally
    bestowed upon you and to maintain in all places, whether in camp or
    in the field, your good name untarnished."

    Per Order,

    CAPTAIN NIMS.

[Illustration: Ormand F. Nims]

While in New Orleans still another presentation took place. This time a
handsome pistol and equipments were presented to Captain Nims by members
of the battery who were not included in the first presentation. A few
words may be quoted from a paper giving an account of this event: "It is
quite refreshing to observe the almost fatherly care and affection for
his men exhibited by Captain Nims and the respect,--we had almost said
adoration--combined with the most perfect discipline on the part of his
men for their beloved commander."

On the 10th of May the battery was transported to Carrollton, where an
outfit of light guns and horses was furnished them to be used in defense
of New Orleans. All troops quartered in New Orleans were ordered to
Carrollton because of the smallpox which was raging in the city. Private
Marsh of the 2d Battery died of this disease at the United States
Hospital on May 13. On the 18th of June, Lieutenant Snow and the other
members of the battery taken at Sabine Cross Roads arrived at New
Orleans, having been lately paroled. Two, however, had died of their
wounds, Privates Maxwell and Howarth.

During the stay a handsome guidon was presented to the members of the
battery by Massachusetts friends then residing in New Orleans. This
guidon was presented by Captain Nims to Governor Draper on June 9, 1910,
and may be seen at the State House in the Hall of Flags. It is of a
golden bronze color, and on it are the crossed cannon of the battery,
the words Second Massachusetts over the state shield and the names of
twelve battles in which the battery took part: Vicksburg, Baton Rouge,
Irish Bend, Vermillion Bayou, Port Hudson, Clinton, Carrion Crow Bayou,
Grand Coteau, Vermillionville, Indian Bend, Wilson's Farm, Sabine Cross
Roads.

As the time of enlistment of the original members was about to expire
and as new recruits were coming in, the battery was divided into two
divisions known as the Old and the New Companies. The veterans were
relieved from nearly all military service while the recruits with new
guns and equipments spent much of their time in drill.

While the men were waiting for transportation North, Captain Nims was
ordered to Boston on recruiting service, and on July 27 he started North
leaving Lieutenant Greenleaf in command of the original battery.

On July 31 they went aboard the United States Mail Steamer _Matanza_ and
started down the river, the whole company singing "Home Sweet Home." All
along the homeward route the men were greeted with public demonstrations
of esteem and appreciation. They arrived in Boston August 9, the company
consisting of 78 men and two officers, Second Lieut. J. W. Greenleaf
being the only officer present, save Captain Nims. They were met at the
station by Captain Nims and Captain Cummings of the Boston Light
Artillery, with a detachment of the company, and were taken to the
United States Hotel, where a handsome breakfast was served. They were
then escorted through the principal streets, arriving at the Armory
about one o'clock. Here a grand dinner was had, after which Mayor
Lincoln welcomed the veterans home in a few brief and cordial words.
Captain Nims responded in an appropriate manner and the men were then
furloughed until the 16th.

On that day they met at the Armory, delivered the flags to Captain Nims
to be put in the State House, and were mustered out of the United States
service August 16, 1864.

While this marks the end of the history of the original Nims' Battery,
as 23 of the original number had reënlisted and recruits had been
received from time to time, the organization of the 2d Massachusetts was
continued. Transportation was taken on the 2d of September for Morganza,
where the battery encamped for the winter. The monotony of this
encampment was varied by scouting expeditions in which the various
sections took part.

Meanwhile, Captain Nims had opened recruiting head-quarters in the North
and soon secured enlistments enough to fill existing vacancies, and in
December was on his way back to the seat of action. Lieutenant Snow, who
had been weakened by his wounds and captivity, was discharged November
30, and on the 7th of January, 1865, Captain Nims resigned his
commission. Lieutenant Marland was promoted to fill the vacancy, the
other lieutenants were advanced, and the second lieutenancies were
filled by the promotion of First Sergeant Louis W. Swan and Sergeant
Jacob M. Ellis, both of Boston.

The battery was next ordered to report to General Steele for active
service, and accordingly arrived at New Orleans on March 7, where it
took transport for Barrancas, Fla., arriving there on the 10th. After
waiting about a week it began its march through the woods and swamps of
Florida toward Mobile. Rain fell most of the time and the mud was
unfathomable. Fighting its way from point to point wherever troops could
fight, the battery finally reached Fort Blakely on April 2. It was
necessary to take this point before proceeding to Mobile, and after
waiting a few days the place was finally taken by assault on April 9,
1865. After the fall of Fort Blakely the battery started with a column
of infantry and cavalry toward Claiborne, Ala. Its last serious conflict
was at Daniel's Landing on the 11th.

For the next seven weeks the battery was almost constantly on the march
until men, horses, and mules were completely worn out. Late in May,
Columbus, Miss., was reached. The men were sent to Mobile and then on to
Vicksburg, which they reached on June 4. Since landing in Florida they
had traveled over 1600 miles.

The company encamped at Vicksburg till July 22, when it turned its
equipment over to the United States authorities and set out for home.

Boston was reached on the 4th of August, the men encamping on Galloupes
Island till the 11th, when they were paid and discharged.

[Illustration: Old Nims Homestead at Deerfield, Mass.]




                       NIMS' BATTERY ASSOCIATION


After over three years of association in camp and field the ties of
comradeship among the members of the battery were too strong to be
ignored and the mustering out of the original members had hardly severed
the official bond than preparations were begun for the formation of an
organization to be known as Nims' Battery Association. On December 10,
1864, a meeting was called at the Webster House, at which time this
association was organized and officers elected.

The preamble to the constitution as given in the first secretary's book
is as follows:

"Associated as we have been together for the past three years both in
camp and on the field of battle, bound together by more than brotherly
ties, we should feel grateful for our safe return and proud to know that
we once constituted a battery that knew no superior in style or action.

"Therefore we the undersigned do organize an association for our mutual
benefit and do hereby adopt the following rules and regulations to
secure good order and to determine our rights, duties and privileges as
members of said association."

The officers chosen at this time were: President, Henry E. Brown;
Vice-President, George E. Ham; Secretary, P. J. Mayer; Treasurer,
William D. Butts.

As the vice-president and secretary declined to serve, these offices
were filled at a subsequent meeting by the election of C. B. Maxwell,
Vice-President; J. S. Knowlton, Secretary.

It was voted that regular meetings should be held monthly and the place
of meeting was to be at Evans Hall, Tremont Row.

The early records of the association give only a hint of the life of the
organization, but we will indicate a few incidents that may be of
interest to the surviving members.

On March 27, 1865, we find that the battery attended as a body the grand
mass meeting of the Veterans' Union held in Tremont Temple, while on
June 1 at a grand procession in Boston it appeared on parade with badges
and drum corps and bearing the colors carried by them during the war. A
letter from Captain Nims, who was then in New Orleans, in reply to a
request for the colors is incorporated in the records and may well be
quoted here.

    "Your note dated April 4 came to hand yesterday morning requesting
    the loan of the company colors on all important occasions, once the
    colors borne by the noble old 2d Massachusetts Battery which I am
    ever proud to call mine. In answer I will say that it gives me great
    pleasure through the representative of the association to tender the
    use of the colors on all important occasions. Knowing well the past
    conduct of the members of the association, I have no fear for the
    care and protection of the colors while under their charge. Wishing
    all prosperity and happiness I subscribe myself

    "Respectfully your humble servant,

    "O. F. NIMS."

Although few fatalities occurred on the field or in camp among the
members of the battery, the first year at home brought death to some of
the number, among whom were Comrade J. C. Tate, who died on April 16,
1865, and Comrade Charles W. Green, who died on June 25 of the same
year. In both instances the battery paid the last sad honors to its
former comrades and in one case gave material aid as well. We also find
under the date August 6, 1866 resolutions on the death of A. Barsantee,
another one of the boys.

The first social event in the history of the association was a grand
ball held about the first of March, 1865. Other balls followed, and
indeed they seem to have become annual affairs kept up for some time;
for in a newspaper clipping we read: "The seventh annual ball of Nims'
Battery Association took place last evening at Boylston Hall. As the
members of this association bear an enviable reputation in matters of
this kind the hall was filled with a very good humored and sociable
company.... These balls always afford a good opportunity for old
comrades to meet and enjoy social intercourse and pleasant
reminiscences."

As time went on and other duties and interests became more imperative,
the monthly meeting at Evans Hall was no longer deemed advisable and
Colonel Nims kindly tendered the use of a room at 80 Cambridge Street,
where the association property could be kept and meetings held. This
offer was accepted and the change made on July 15, 1867.

We have no records as to where and when the first annual banquet took
place. We find, however, an interesting account of the fourth annual
banquet taken from the Boston _Journal_, undated, which is as follows:

"The fourth annual reunion of the Nims' Battery Association was held
last evening in the parlors of the American House. About 40 members were
present, most of them men who went out at the first and stayed at the
post till the battery was mustered out of service. General William
Schouler was the invited guest on this occasion.

"After an hour's social intercourse the meeting was called to order by
the President, Col. O. F. Nims.

"The committee appointed to consider the matter of the preparation of
the history of the battery reported that little progress had been made.
Some material had been collected but more funds were needed. The matter
was discussed quite freely, with the prevailing opinion that the work
should be completed and published.... After dinner was served, General
Schouler was called upon and said he was glad to meet Colonel Nims and
his old command and would only say what was said of them when at the
front that this battery was one of the best, if not the best, that went
from Massachusetts.... The regular toasts were then announced."

Our Country--response by Mr. Thomas Knights who sang America.

Massachusetts--response by Captain Marland.

Nims' Battery--response letter from Col. H. E. Paine, etc.

Another interesting meeting was held on December 12, 1879. "It was the
first gathering of the old organization which had occurred for five
years and fully 40 members were present accompanied by several of the
13th Battery. The early part of the evening was spent in social
intercourse, singing of songs, and the election of officers. The after
dinner exercises included speeches, reminiscences of camp life and
interesting facts concerning the association since the close of the war.
Letters of regret were received from many prominent members of the old
battery and from Col. H. E. Paine of the 4th Wisconsin Regiment."

Other notable occasions were the reunion at the home of Comrade John G.
Dimick, Worcester, where the hospitality of the host and his wife made
the meeting especially delightful, and the 25th anniversary in 1890 when
nearly fifty of the boys together with Generals Dudley and Kimball and
Past Deputy Commander Billings as guests gathered at the call of the
bugler to a feast of good things and an evening of fellowship and army
stories.

In 1888 the Nims' Battery Ladies' Social Club was organized and since
that date has held its meetings annually at the time of the battery
reunion. Its members are the mothers, wives, and daughters or indeed any
relative of the men of the battery and its purpose is not solely social
but mutually helpful as well. It aims to visit the sick among the
members, to give material aid if necessary and in any way possible
assist the organization to which it is auxiliary.

The annual reunions were at first held on February 22, but in recent
years this date has been changed to April 19.

As the years have passed the grim reaper Death has appeared more and
more often and the ranks have gradually thinned until in 1912 only 14 of
the regular members were present at the annual reunion.

To those who remain, however, the memories and associations of more than
a half century ago are still precious, and form a bond which will be
broken only when life itself shall cease.




                      LIFE OF COL. ORMAND F. NIMS


A history of the 2d Massachusetts Light Artillery will hardly be
regarded as complete unless it contains a sketch of the life of its
commander, Capt. Ormand F. Nims.[18]

Footnote 18:

  The facts concerning the early history of the Nims family have been
  taken from addresses given by Rev. J. L. Seward, D.D., Keene, N. H.

From the time of the early settlement of America down to the last war in
which the United States has been engaged, the Nims family has
participated in the offensive and defensive campaigns of the country
save only in the war with Mexico. Indeed it may truly be said that the
commander of Nims' Battery came of good fighting stock. The family of
Nims is descended from the old Huguenots of France, coming from that
part of the country where is situated the city Nismes, from which is
derived the family name de Nismes, or as it is now written Nims.
Godefroi de Nismes, or as known here, Godfrey Nims came to this country
in the 17th century, the first mention of his name being found in the
records of Northampton under the date September 4, 1667. He was in
Turner's Fight, May 18, 1676 and was a soldier in King Philip's War. He
was twice married. His first wife was Mary, daughter of William Miller
and widow of Zebadiah Williams. His second wife was Mehitabel, daughter
of William Smead and widow of Jeremiah Hall. He had six children by his
first wife and five by the second. Rebecca (died young), Rebecca, John,
Henry, Thankful, Ebenezer, Thomas, Mehitabel, Mary, Mercy and Abigail.
The family of Godfrey Nims were victims of that terrible Indian tragedy
which resulted in the destruction of Deerfield, Mass., to which place
Mr. Nims had moved in 1686. This calamity occurred February 29, 1704. On
that fatal day, Mrs. Nims was captured and was slain on the way to
Canada. Her dwelling was destroyed by fire. The eldest surviving
daughter, then Mrs. Mattoon, was slain, together with an only child,
Henry; the eldest son was captured and slain. Ebenezer, the second son,
was captured and carried to Canada. Mehitabel, Mary and Mercy were
burned with the house. Abigail, the youngest was captured at the age of
four years and carried to Canada, where she married another captive,
Josiah Rising, then christened Ignace Raizeune, received a permanent
home, and a large domain.

It does not appear that Godfrey Nims was captured at this time. The
suggestion has been made that he was with a military company elsewhere.
An inventory of his estate was taken at Deerfield, March 12, 1704, or 5,
the presumption being that he had died there just previously.

Ebenezer and John were the two surviving sons of Godfrey. John has many
descendants in Michigan and other parts of the West. Ebenezer was
carried to Canada as was also another captive, Sarah Hoyt. These two
were married in Canada and had there one son also named Ebenezer. They
were redeemed by Stoddard and Williams with difficulty in 1814 and
returned to Deerfield, where four more sons were born, David, Moses,
Elisha, Amasa. David, son of Ebenezer, was born at Deerfield, March 30,
1716 and died in Keene, July 21, 1803. He came to Keene while a boy and
was appointed scribe by the proprietors July 25, 1737. At the first town
meeting after the town was chartered by New Hampshire which was held May
2, 1753, he was elected first town clerk and after that held some town
office nearly every year till 1776. In 1740, he was granted 10 acres of
upland in Keene, for hazarding his life and estate by living in the
place to promote the settlement of the township. Still later he was
granted 104 acres in that part of Keene, which is now in the town of
Roxbury. This estate is at present occupied by David Brigham Nims, his
great great-grandson. He had ten children one of whom Asahel fell at the
battle of Bunker Hill. "On the morning when Captain Wyman and his men
left Keene for Massachusetts, Asahel came into town from his home on the
Sullivan Hills where he was clearing land and getting ready to settle
with one whom he hoped soon to marry. He saw the military movement and
was fired with that spirit of military and patriotic fervor which has
been such a characteristic of the Nims family. One fellow who had
enlisted did not have the courage to start. Asahel consented to take
that fellow's place and lost his life in his first battle. He was buried
on the battlefield and his name is recorded on one of the gates of
Bunker Hill Park."

Zadok, another son and the grandfather of Col. Ormand Nims fought at
Lake Champlain, and it is a tradition concerning him that at this time
he became so exhausted that his commander and comrades believed him
dead. They were preparing his body for burial, when to their delighted
surprise he came to his senses and afterward fully recovered.

Col. Ormand F. Nims was born in Sullivan, N. H., August 30, 1819, his
father, Philander Nims, being a farmer in that vicinity and his mother,
the daughter of Col. Solomon White of Uxbridge, Mass.

Colonel White served seven years in the War for Independence and later
commanded a Massachusetts regiment at the head of which he marched to
Worcester at the time of Shay's Rebellion. An uncle, Frederick Nims,
served during the War of 1812 performing creditable military service.

Ormand Nims was twenty-three years old when he left the farm in Sullivan
and came to Boston, where in 1854 he bought a drug store on Cambridge
Street and set up in business for himself. His first taste of a military
career had been when, a boy of fifteen, he had joined the Sullivan
Militia commanded by his brother. In 1853 he with his two brothers
joined the Lancers and this branch of the militia of Massachusetts had
no more ardent members than these three young men from New Hampshire.

It happened that about this time General Sherman's Battery of United
States artillery came to Boston from Newport for the purpose of giving
an exhibition in encampment, parade, and drill on Boston Common. Young
Nims saw the drill and was delighted; after this nothing would do for
him but the artillery.

Early in 1854 he enlisted in a new battery raised under command of Capt.
Moses G. Cobb, and was made first sergeant on the night of his
enlistment. After three years of service, he was made fourth lieutenant
and later received command of the battery. During his term of command he
made this battery famous for its efficiency and perfect organization.

"I resigned from my command in 1860," said Colonel Nims in an interview
some years since, "and my last appearance with it, my last parade in
fact, was on the occasion of the review on Boston Common by the Prince
of Wales, the late King Edward, who was on a visit to America."

Then came the Civil War. The battery with which Colonel Nims had been
connected was among the first to volunteer and although he was not a
member he rendered efficient aid in equipping and drilling the men,
accompanying them as far as New York when they started on active
service. Just as he took the train, a prominent official said to him,
"Nims, we will have six guns ready for you when you return."

The organization of the 2d Massachusetts and its service in the field
has already been recorded in the pages of this book and this naturally
includes the military career of its captain.

A few quotations may serve to show the more personal side of Colonel
Nims and the relations existing between the commander and his men.

The following extract is from a letter written by an officer while at
Franklin, La. "Captain Nims is the hardest working officer I ever saw,
always looking out for the interests of the battery and the men. Hardly
ever in his quarters, nothing escapes his observation. He is a man of
strict probity and has none of the minor vices, always reliable and
reminds one of the hero Garibaldi. Although proud of his battery and its
reputation, and pleased at anything written or said in its praise, he
thoroughly detests personal flattery and indeed I would not venture to
say this much to him for my commission."

A quotation from the Boston _Transcript_ at the close of the war: "It is
a remarkable fact that during the three and a half years that Captain
Nims commanded the 2d Battery, punishment was to its members almost
unknown. Splendid discipline was maintained solely by _esprit de corps_
and by the respect and affection entertained for the commander on one
hand and by the fatherly care and solicitude always exhibited by Captain
Nims for his men under all circumstances. The slight mortality by
disease in this battery is attributed by the members to the efficiency
of their leader."

Some years after the war a niece of Colonel Nims was visiting in the
South and dined at the home of a former Confederate captain. She was
told that at one time during the war, orders were given to the
Confederate officers to kill Captain Nims at any cost as his battery was
inflicting so much damage upon their forces.

After the discharge of the original Nims' Battery at the end of three
years, Captain Nims immediately secured enough enlistments for another
battery and at once returned to New Orleans. But an injury to his ankle
received while he was at home to muster out his men, and the fact that
most of his boys were no longer with him led him to resign his
commission and accept a position in the Chief Quarter-Master's
department at New Orleans, where he remained till after the close of the
war. After peace had been fully restored and the work of reconstruction
had been begun, Captain Nims returned to Boston and bought back the
little drug store he had left at the beginning of the war, where he
remained for nearly a half century until at the age of ninety he retired
from business, in 1910. After the return of peace the attention of the
government was directed to Captain Nims' services and on March 13, 1865,
by special enactment of the Senate he received the titles of "Brevet
Major--Brevet Lieutenant-Colonel--and Brevet Colonel, for gallant and
meritorious service during the war," thus explaining the title Colonel
Nims.

After leaving the army, Colonel Nims took almost no part in military or
political affairs--except in connection with Nims' Battery Association
and for a short time serving as commander of Post 7, G.A.R. He was also
a member of the Loyal Legion. He would never accept a pension. To quote
his own words on the subject, "I don't want a pension. It doesn't seem
right to me that a man should be paid by the Federal government simply
because he was in the army. I served my country to the best of my
ability and I don't want any pay for it either. If one were
incapacitated for earning a living that would be a different matter."

During the half century that Colonel Nims maintained his drug store at
the West End he saw many changes in that neighborhood. Someone has said
that he served the poor and needy from his little store as faithfully as
he ever served his country in the days of the war. Everyone in that
section regarded him as a friend and helper, and he was always ready to
give aid to those who needed it. He made it a practice to give away one
prescription at least, every day. If the families of any of his men were
in need, it was his delight to care for and assist them.

Colonel Nims died at his home, 42 Blossom Street, on May 23, 1911, at
the age of 91 years. His funeral was held at Trinity Church on May 25
and was attended by the remaining members of the battery and by members
of the Loyal Legion together with many friends who honored and loved
him. He was buried in Mount Hope Cemetery.

A Christian patriot and soldier.




                 ROSTER OF SECOND MASSACHUSETTS BATTERY


SECOND BATTERY LIGHT ARTILLERY, M. V.--(THREE YEARS.) (From Record of
Massachusetts Volunteers.)

 _Name and Rank._         _Age._ _Residence   _Date of    _Termination
                                 or Place     Muster._    of Service._
                                 Credited
                                 To._

 Nims, Ormand F., Capt.   ..     Boston       July 31,    Jan. 7, 1865,
                                              '61         resigned.

 Marland, William, Capt.  29     Andover      Jan. 8, '65 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          exp. of
                                                          service, B'vt
                                                          Maj.

 Walcott, John W., 1st    39     Roxbury      July 31,    Dec. 18, 1861,
 Lieut.                                       '61         resigned.

 Bigelow, John, 1st       21     Cambridge    July 31,    Dec. 18, 1861,
 Lieut.                                       '61         resigned.

 Trull, George G., 1st    30     Boston       Dec. 18,    Oct. 21, 1862,
 Lieut.                                       '61         Captain 4th
                                                          Battery.

 Hall, Richard B., 1st    23     Boston       Dec. 18,    July 29, 1863,
 Lieut.                                       '61         resigned.

 Marland, William, 1st    27     Andover      Oct. 22,    Captain Jan.
 Lieut.                                       '62         8, 1865.

 Snow, Warren K., 1st     29     Boston       July 30,    Nov. 30, 1864,
 Lieut.                                       '63         disability.

 Greenleaf, Joseph W.,    34     Boston       Dec. 1, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
 1st Lieut.                                               expiration of
                                                          service.

 Hodgdon, Lucian A., 1st  33     Somerville   Jan. 8, '65 Aug. 11, 1865,
 Lieut.                                                   expiration of
                                                          service.

 Trull, George G., 2d     29     Boston       July 31,    First Lieut.,
 Lieut.                                       '61         Dec. 18, 1861.

 Hall, Richard B., 2d     22     Boston       July 31,    First Lieut.,
 Lieut.                                       '61         Dec. 18, 1861.

 Marland, William, 2d     26     Andover      Dec. 18,    First Lieut.,
 Lieut.                                       '61         Oct. 22, 1862.

 Snow, Warren K., 2d      27     Boston       Feb. 21,    First Lieut.,
 Lieut.                                       '62         July 30, 1863.

 Russell, Edward K., 2d   30     Chelsea      Oct. 22,    Oct. 3, 1863,
 Lieut.                                       '62         First Lieut.,
                                                          6th Battery.

 Greenleaf, Joseph W., 2d 32     Boston       July 30,    First Lieut.,
 Lieut.                                       '63         Dec. 1, 1864.

 Hodgdon, Lucian A., 2d   31     Somerville   Oct. 3, '63 First Lieut.,
 Lieut.                                                   Jan. 8, 1865.

 Swan, Louis W., 2d       30     Chelsea      Dec. 1, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
 Lieut.                                                   expiration of
                                                          service.

 Ellis, Jacob M., 2d      26     Melrose      Jan. 8, '65 Aug. 11, 1865,
 Lieut.                                                   expiration of
                                                          service.

 Jackman, Henry A., Q. M. 34     Boston       Jan. 6, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
 Sergt.                                                   expiration of
                                                          service.

 Norcross, Alden N., Q.   32     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
 M. Sergt.                                    '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Burwell, Augustus B.,    26     Chelsea      July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
 1st Sergt.                                   '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Chamberlain, Lowell A.,  22     Maiden       July 31,    Dec. 16, 1861,
 1st Sergt.                                   '61         promotion.

 Cheever, Henry P., 1st   34     Boston       July 31,    1862,
 Sergt.                                       '61         disability.

 Downing, Matthias, 1st   30     Boston       Feb. 16,    Aug. 11, 1865,
 Sergt.                                       '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Greenleaf, Joseph W.,    32     Boston       July 31,    Second Lieut.,
 1st Sergt.                                   '61         July 30, 1863.

 Hodgdon, Lucian A., 1st  31     Somerville   July 31,    Feb. 15, 1864,
 Sergt.                                       '61         re-enlistment.

 Hodgdon, Lucian A., 1st  33     Boston       Feb. 16,    Second Lieut.,
 Sergt.                                       '64         May 21, 1864.

 Jordon, William W., 1st  31     Boston       Jan. 6, '64 Sept. 30,
 Sergt.                                                   1864, 1st
                                                          Lieut. 3d Un.
                                                          Co. H. Art.

 Russell, Edward K., 1st  30     Chelsea      July 31,    Second Lieut.,
 Sergt.                                       '61         Oct. 22, 1862.

 Snow, Warren K., 1st     27     Boston       July 31,    Second Lieut.,
 Sergt.                                       '61         Feb. 21, 1862.

 Swan, Louis W., 1st      32     Boston       Feb. 16,    Second Lieut.,
 Sergt.                                       '64         Dec. 1, 1864.

 Allen, John W., Sergt.   24     Boston       Feb. 16.    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Ellis, Jacob M., Sergt.  28     Boston       Feb. 16,    Second Lieut.,
                                              '64         Jan. 8, 1965.

 Fisk, John D., Sergt.    28     Boston       Feb. 16,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Harvey, Orlando C.,      24     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
 Sergt.                                       '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Hodgkins, John P.,       27     Gloucester   Dec. 7, '63 Aug. 11, 1865,
 Sergt.                                                   expiration of
                                                          service.

 Jordan, William W.,      29     Boston       July 31,    Jan. 5, 1864,
 Sergt.                                       '61         re-enlistment.

 Kane, William, Sergt.    20     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Lincoln, Silas S.,       35     Maiden       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
 Sergt.                                       '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Livermore, Converse F.,  26     Watertown    July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
 Sergt.                                       '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Partridge, Samuel,       29     Boston       Jan. 6, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
 Sergt.                                                   expiration of
                                                          service.

 Swan, Louis W., Sergt.   30     Chelsea      July 31,    Feb. 15, 1864,
                                              '61         re-enlistment.

 Ward, John B., Sergt.    27     Boston       Dec. 1, '63 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Whitcher, Frank J.,      21     Boston       July 31,    Dec. 17, 1861,
 Sergt.                                       '61         Sec. Lieut.
                                                          1st Md. Bat'y.

 Wilkins, Robert J.       27     Boston       Feb. 16,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Ackerman, Joseph R.,     32     Boston       July 31,    Deserted Jan.
 Corp.                                        '61         1, 1862.

 Andrews, Erastus E.,     28     Sunderland   Dec. 2, '63 Aug. 11, 1865,
 Corp.                                                    expiration of
                                                          service.

 Bellows, Frederick A.,   44     Charlestown  July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
 Corp.                                        '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Butts, William D., Corp. 27     Charlestown  July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Dickenson, Daniel O.,    18     Hadley       Jan. 4, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
 Corp.                                                    expiration of
                                                          service.

 Downing, Matthias, Corp. 28     Boston       July 31,    Feb. 15, 1864,
                                              '61         re-enlistment.

 Ellis, Jacob M., Corp.   26     Melrose      July 31,    Feb. 15, 1864,
                                              '61         re-enlistment.

 Evans, Elbridge, Corp.   29     Boston       Feb. 16,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Foster, Thomas B., Corp. 22     Boston       Feb. 16,    Died June 6,
                                              '64         1865, New
                                                          Orleans, La.

 Green, Charles W., Corp. 26     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Ham, George E., Corp.    26     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Hodgkins, Frederick T.,  21     Gloucester   Dec. 7, '63 Aug. 11, 1865,
 Corp.                                                    expiration of
                                                          service.

 Hodgkins, Morris, Jr.,   40     Gloucester   Dec. 7, '63 Aug. 11, 1865,
 Corp.                                                    expiration of
                                                          service.

 Howe, Francis E., Corp.  27     Melrose      July 31,    Jan. 8, 1863,
                                              '61         disability.

 Kane, James H., Corp.    23     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Knowlton, Joseph S.,     25     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
 Corp.                                        '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Knowles, Osgood W.,      25     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1804,
 Corp.                                        '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Leavitt, Edwin L., Corp. 29     Boston       Oct. 10,    Died Aug. 5,
                                              '61         1862, Baton
                                                          Rouge, La.

 Maxwell, Charles B.,     29     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
 Corp.                                        '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Merrill, Charles, Corp.  28     Chelsea      Mar. 4, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Oliver, Charles E.,      22     Lunenburg    Jan. 4, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
 Corp.                                                    expiration of
                                                          service.

 Sherman, Charles F.      20     Watertown    July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Short, John F., Corp.    28     Lowell       Aug. 10,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Smith, John R., Corp.    26     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Sylvester, Charles S.,   18     Gloucester   Dec. 7, '63 Aug. 11, 1865,
 Corp.                                                    expiration of
                                                          service.

 Swart, John W., Corp.    22     Pittsfield   Jan. 5, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Tyler, Thomas R., Corp.  24     Charlestown  July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Wadsworth, George W.,    ..     Quincy       July 31,    Sept. ..,
 Corp.                                        '61         1861,
                                                          disability.

 Wadsworth, Henry M.,     23     Boston       July 31,    Sept. 30,
 Corp.                                        '61         1861,
                                                          disability.

 Welch, Henry, Corp.      21     Pittsfield   Jan. 4, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Whitmore, Benjamin F.,   26     Boston       Feb. 16,    Aug. 11, 1865,
 Corp.                                        '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Wilkins, Robert J.,      25     Boston       July 31,    Feb. 15, 1864,
 Corp.                                        '61         re-enlistment.

 Hodgdon, Moses, Bugler   19     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Hughes, John, Bugler     22     Barnstable   Jan. 25,    Died July 23,
                                              '64         1865,
                                                          Vicksburg,
                                                          Miss.

 O'Grady, Joseph, Bugler  24     Quincy       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Brown, Henry E.,         34     Charlestown  July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
 Artificer                                    '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Cobb, Cyrus W.,          35     Malden       July 31,    Dec. 5, 1862,
 Artificer                                    '61         disability.

 Gould, Reuben B. H.,     43     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
 Artificer                                    '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Hatch, Seth H.,          41     Boston       July 31,    Feb. 14, 1864,
 Artificer                                    '61         re-enlistment.

 Hatch, Seth H.,          43     Somerville   Feb. 15,    Aug. 11, 1865,
 Artificer                                    '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Haven, Joseph S.,        28     Boston       July 31,    Died July 31,
 Artificer                                    '61         1862, Baton
                                                          Rouge, La.

 Jacobus, Peter,          40     Boston       July 31,    ....
 Artificer                                    '61

 Stevens, Simeon, Wagoner 39     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Allen, Henry B.          27     Gloucester   Dec. 7, '63 Died June 30,
                                                          1864, New
                                                          Orleans, La.

 Allen, John W.           22     Boston       July 31,    Feb. 15, 1864,
                                              '61         re-enlistment.

 Allis, Newton R.         36     Buckland     Sept. 14,   Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Andrews, Edwin A.        25     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Anthony, Charles S.      29     Taunton      Sept. 2,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Annis, David             36     Taunton      Sept. 6,    Transferred
                                              '64         Dec. 23, 1864
                                                          to 6th
                                                          Battery.

 Avery, Daniel P.         21     Boston       Nov. 20,    Dec. 25, 1863,
                                              '62         re-enlistment.

 Avery, Daniel P.         23     Danvers      Dec. 26,    Deserted Jan.
                                              '63         .., 1864.

 Avery, James T.          21     Colrain      Sept. 3,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Barsantee, Alphonso      29     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Barrett, Charles H.      21     Boston       Jan. 20,    Deserted,
                                              '64         never joined
                                                          Battery.

 Barney, Edward F.        23     Southborough July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Barton, Frederick N.     18     Heath        Aug. 30,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Barnes, Henry Q.         22     Boston       July 31,    Died Aug. 14,
                                              '61         1862, New
                                                          Orleans, La.

 Bartlett, Hiram          24     Charlestown  Dec. 11,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '62         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Bates, William T.        22     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Bellew, John             40     Boston       Jan. 12,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Benoit, Nazar            18     Hadley       Jan. 4, '64 Died Apr. 18,
                                                          1864, New
                                                          Orleans, La.

 Bicknell, Ira S.         37     Charlestown  Sept. 8,    Apr. 20, 1863,
                                              '62         disability.

 Blaisdell, Clark         23     Waltham      Feb. 15,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Blanchard, George E.     21     Chelsea      Mar. 16,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Bolton, Joseph F.        ..     Quincy       July 31,    Apr. 16, 1862,
                                              '61         civil
                                                          authority.

 Bolton, William          21     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Braman, John W.          18     Hadley       Jan. 4, '64 June 15, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Brigham, Francis O.      27     Needham      July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Brown, Edwin W.          35     Boston       July 31,    Sept. 17,
                                              '61         1862,
                                                          disability.

 Brown, Francis G.        25     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Brown, James             35     Truro        Feb. 24,    Feb. 28, 1864,
                                              '64         rejected
                                                          recruit.

 Brown, James L.          41     Boston       Dec. 17,    Dec. 24, 1863,
                                              '63         rejected
                                                          recruit.

 Brown, Joseph F.         35     Rowe         Aug. 30,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Brown, J. M.             29     Quincy       July 31,    ....
                                              '61

 Brown, William           25     Raynham      Jan. 4, '64 Deserted,
                                                          never joined
                                                          Battery.

 Bryant, Zeba H.          34     N.           Sept. 3,    Transferred
                                 Bridgewater  '64         Dec. 23, 1864,
                                                          to 6th
                                                          Battery.

 Buck, Orsemus L.         39     Boston       Jan. 12,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Bullard, Revel           37     Rowe         Aug. 30,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Burns, William           38     Boston       Nov. 28,    Dec. 15, 1863,
                                              '63         disability.

 Bushman, Leander         21     Hadley       Jan. 4, '64 Drowned, Dec.
                                                          18, 1864, from
                                                          str. _N.
                                                          America_.

 Butler, Levi T.          24     Boston       July 31,    Feb. 15, 1864,
                                              '61         re-enlistment.

 Butler, Levi T.          26     Boston       Feb. 16,    Transferred
                                              '64         June 21, 1864,
                                                          to Navy.

 Buxton, Richard F.       21     Lunenburg    Dec. 31,    July 18, 1865,
                                              '63         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Call, Levi E.            20     Colrain      Sept. 3,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Carpenter, Francis L.    21     Taunton      Dec. 12,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Carter, John F.          24     Boston       July 31,    Jan. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         disability.

 Carroll, John, Jr.       21     Barnstable   Sept. 2,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Carney, Joseph           26     Reading      Dec. 9, '63 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Caswell, Joseph L.       23     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Chadbourne, Bradford H.  38     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Chase, Stephen J.        44     Boston       Jan. 8, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Childs, Ralph            42     Colrain      Sept. 6,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Clayton, Herbert         21     Boston       Feb. 3, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Clark, James             32     Somerville   Mar. 18,    Deserted,
                                              '64         never joined
                                                          Battery.

 Clogston, Luman          25     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Cobb, James M.           23     Charlestown  July 31,    Apr. 2, 1864,
                                              '61         disability.

 Coffey, James            25     N.           Sept. 3,    Transferred
                                 Bridgewater  '64         Dec. 23, 1864
                                                          to 13th
                                                          Battery.

 Conley, John             40     Bridgewater  Sept. 2,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Corcoran, Michael H.     30     Boston       Jan. 1, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Cowdrey, Nathaniel       38     S. Reading   Jan. 1, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Craig, George            21     Barnstable   Sept. 1,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Crockett, William H.     30     Boston       July 31,    Oct. 18, 1862,
                                              '61         disability.

 Cruise, William          18     Southampton  Jan. 1, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Curtis, Edmund B.        36     Abington     Sept. 3,    Transferred
                                              '64         Dec. 23, '64
                                                          to 6th
                                                          Battery.

 Curtis, Frederick N.     29     Medford      July 31,    Jan. 5, 1864,
                                              '61         re-enlistment.

 Curtis, Frederick N.     31     Medford      Jan. 6, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Cushing, Lyman F. W.     19     Medford      July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Dalton, John             21     Rockport     Aug. 27,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          services.

 Davis, Benjamin P.       21     Boston       July 31,    ....
                                              '61

 Davison, Cyrus           31     Boston       July 31,    Died Aug. 3,
                                              '61         1862, Baton
                                                          Rouge, La.

 Davis, Frederick A.      43     Bridgewater  Feb. 23,    Feb. 28, 1864,
                                              '64         rejected
                                                          recruit.

 Davis, James H.          21     Colrain      Sept. 5,    Transferred
                                              '64         Dec. 23, 1864
                                                          to 6th
                                                          Battery.

 Davis, Robert W.         28     Somerville   Jan. 5, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Day, Samuel C.           32     Gloucester   Dec. 8, '63 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Dennis, John             30     Cohasset     Aug. 31,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Dewey, William C.        26     Colrain      July 9, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Doe, William F.          22     Meredith,    July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                 N.H.         '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Dollard, John            21     Greenwich    Sept. 15,   Transferred to
                                              '64         13th Battery.

 Dow, Joseph E.           37     Chelsea      July 31,    Oct. 18, 1862,
                                              '61         disability.

 Downs, Thomas J.         23     Boston       Jan. 14,    Jan. 17, 1864,
                                              '64         rejected
                                                          recruit.

 Donahue, John M.         22     Cohasset     Aug. 29,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Donahue, Thomas          24     N.           Dec. 3, '64 Transferred
                                 Bridgewater              Dec. 23, '64,
                                                          to 6th
                                                          Battery.

 Drury, James             42     Boston       Jan. 1, '64 Jan. 3, 1864,
                                                          rejected
                                                          recruit.

 Duggan, Edmund B.        19     Southampton  Jan. 1, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Duprey, Edwin            23     Boston       Sept. 5,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Eastman, William H.      22     Melrose      July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Eldridge, Ellery W.      19     Chelsea      July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Elliott, James E.        18     Blackstone   Mar. 1, '64 Mar. 3, 1864,
                                                          rejected
                                                          recruit.

 Elmer, Spencer W.        20     Heath        Aug. 30,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Evans, Elbridge          27     Charlestown  July 31,    Feb. 15, 1864,
                                              '61         re-enlistment.

 Farnum, Charles G.       43     Boston       Dec. 28,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '63         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Ferren, Loren            19     Taunton      Sept. 3,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Fickett, William         22     Duxbury      Jan. 21,    Died Aug. 19,
                                              '61         1865, Gallop's
                                                          Island.

 Fillebrown, Henry A.     23     Waltham      July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Finnegan, Bernard        28     Boston       Mar. 14,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Fisk, John D.            26     Southbridge  July 31,    Feb. 15, 1864,
                                              '61         re-enlistment.

 Flemming, Nathaniel      28     Charlestown  Dec. 7, '63 Deserted Oct.
                                                          18, 1864, New
                                                          Orleans, La.

 Fletcher, John W.        23     Billerica    July 31,    ....
                                              '61

 Flynn, Thomas            45     Charlestown  Dec. 12,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '63         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Folsom, Ezra F.          26     Truro        Jan. 11,    Died May 24,
                                              '64         1864, Baton
                                                          Rouge, La.

 Forbes, John A.          34     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Foster, Edward           32     Boston       Dec. 5, '63 Deserted,
                                                          never joined
                                                          Battery.

 Foster, Thomas B.        20     Stoughton    July 31,    Feb. 15, 1864,
                                              '61         re-enlistment.

 Foulds, John             19     Taunton      Sept. 2,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Foye, William E.         18     Braintree    Sept. 3,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 French, Loring A.        39     Quincy       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Galloway, Charles        25     Waltham      June 23,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Gannon, Cornelius        22     Truro        Feb. 24,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Garrett, William         21     Lowell       July 31,    Transferred
                                              '61         Sept. 1, 1861,
                                                          to 17th M. V.

 Gibson, Edward           22     Boston       Mar. 14,    Deserted,
                                              '64         never joined
                                                          Battery.

 Gill, John E.            21     Taunton      Sept. 5,    Transferred
                                              '64         Dec. 23, 1864,
                                                          to 13th
                                                          Battery.

 Gleason, Samuel K.       30     Heath        Aug. 30,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Goodrich, Edward C.      22     Lunenburg    Dec. 31,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '63         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Goodwin, William H.      20     Weymouth     July 31,    Feb. 15, 1864,
                                              '61         re-enlistment.

 Goodwin, William H.      22     Boston       Feb. 16,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Glover, Edward W.        26     Maiden       July 31,    Oct. .., 1862,
                                              '61         disability.

 Grover, Fitzroy          19     Chicopee     Aug. 31,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Haggerty, John           26     Pittsfield   Jan. 18,    Deserted,
                                              '64         never joined
                                                          Battery.

 Hall, Arthur W.          18     Heath        Aug. 30,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Hale, Russell            19     Gardner      July 2, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Haley, Samuel, Jr.       21     W. Boylston  July 31,'61 Sept. ..,
                                                          1862,
                                                          disability.

 Hammond, Charles         31     Dorchester   July 26,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Hamilton, Charles        31     Truro        Jan. 12,    Jan. 13, 1864,
                                              '64         rejected
                                                          recruit.

 Hamilton, Charles H.     21     Taunton      Sept. 2,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Hammond, Daniel M.       19     Charlestown  July 31,    Jan. 5, 1864,
                                              '61         re-enlistment.

 Hammond, Daniel M.       21     Charlestown  Jan. 6, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Hamour, George B.        23     Boston       July 31,    Apr. 20, 1863,
                                              '61         disability.

 Ham, James H.            20     Boston       Jan. 14,    Transferred
                                              '64         June 21, 1864,
                                                          to Navy.

 Harvey, Alexander D.     21     Boston       Oct. 10,    Oct. 15, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Harkins, Daniel          21     Templeton    Jan. 4, '64 Jan. 6, 1864,
                                                          rejected
                                                          recruit.

 Harvey, George B.        22     Taunton      Sept. 5,    Transferred
                                              '64         Dec. 23, 1864,
                                                          to 13th
                                                          Battery.

 Harvey, Joseph R.        22     Boston       July 31,    Died Aug. 10,
                                              '61         1862, New
                                                          Orleans, La.

 Hauff, Rudolph           34     Boston       July 31,    Died 1863, New
                                              '61         Orleans, La.

 Hayward, Hampton V.      24     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Hess, Phillip            18     Hinsdale     Jan. 18,    Jan. 24, 1864,
                                              '64         rejected
                                                          recruit.

 Hidden, William G.       21     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Hill, Augustus E.        34     Phillipston  Dec. 24,    Jan. 9, 1864,
                                              '63         rejected
                                                          recruit.

 Hobbs, Joseph A.         23     Boston       July 31,    Oct. 18, 1862,
                                              '61         disability.

 Holmes, Elmer W.         22     N.           Sept. 10,   Transferred
                                 Bridgewater  '64         Dec. 23, 1864,
                                                          to 6th
                                                          Battery.

 Holme, Frederick         32     Boston       ...., '62   Jan. 5, 1864,
                                                          re-enlistment.

 Holme, Frederick         34     Boston       Jan. 6, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Houghton, George E.      21     Boston       July 31,    June 25, 1862,
                                              '61         disability.

 Howe, Edwin S.           ..     Quincy       July 31,    Never joined
                                              '61         for service.

 Howard, Henry A.         22     Colrain      Sept. 5,    Transferred
                                              '64         Dec. 23, 1864,
                                                          to 6th
                                                          Battery.

 Howarth, John H.         19     Boston       Dec. 7, '63 Died of
                                                          wounds, May 2,
                                                          1864,
                                                          Mansfield, La.

 Howard, William R.       25     Malden       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Hubbard, Amos S.         21     Boston       Mar. 3, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Hubbard, Stephen L.      28     Charlestown  July 31,    Aug. 14, 1863,
                                              '61         2d Lieut. 2d
                                                          Heavy Art'y.

 Hudson, Thomas           36     Boston       Aug. 30,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Hurd, Henry              23     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Jackman, Henry A.        32     Boston       July 31,    Jan. 5, 1864,
                                              '61         re-enlistment.

 Jaunotte, Abraham        26     Hadley       Jan. 25,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Jeffords, George R.      40     Rowe         Aug. 30,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Jennings, Stephen E.     29     Chicopee     July 31,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Julian, George N.        20     Exeter, N.   July 31,    Sept. 13,
                                 H.           '61         1862, Capt.
                                                          13th N. H.
                                                          Vols.

 Kelly, Robert N.         23     Boston       Dec. 19,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '63         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Kelly, Thomas            28     Boston       Dec. 18,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '63         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Kimball, Martin B.       25     Boston       Oct. 16,    Oct. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 King, Phineas F.         26     Watertown    July 31,    1862,
                                              '61         disability.

 Knight, Thomas W.        19     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Knights, William W.      29     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Lamberton, George        42     Sandwich     Mar. 10,    July 1, 1864,
                                              '64         disability.

 Lamb, Hiram K.           46     Boston       July 31,    Apr. 15, 1862,
                                              '61         disability.

 Lancy, Eli S.            32     Lunenburg    Jan. 4, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Lang, James              27     Boston       July 31,    Feb. 15, 1864,
                                              '61         re-enlistment.

 Lang, James              29     Boston       Feb. 16,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Lancour, Louis           37     Hadley       Jan. 4, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Larrabee, George W.      25     Boston       Dec. 18,    Died Apr. 16,
                                              '63         1864, New
                                                          Orleans, La.

 Larivere, Jacob          23     Hadley       Jan. 4, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Leavitt, James M.        28     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Lemill, Shubael          43     Charlestown  Jan. 5, '64 Deserted,
                                                          never joined
                                                          Battery.

 Leonard, James L.        22     Taunton      Sept. 5,    Transferred
                                              '64         Dec. 23, 1864
                                                          to 13th
                                                          Battery.

 Leonard, John S.         24     Cambridge    July 31,    Died Sept. 29,
                                              '61         1862, New
                                                          Orleans, La.

 Little, Orison           25     Charlestown  July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Littlefield, Roger S.    26     Charlestown  July 31,    Transferred
                                              '61         Sept. 10,
                                                          1861, to 18th
                                                          Regt.

 Littlefield, William     ..     Quincy       July 31,    Never joined
                                              '61         for service.

 Lombard, Edwin           31     Boston       July 31,    Died Aug. 10,
                                              '61         1862, New
                                                          Orleans, La.

 Long, George             28     Neponset     July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Longley, Isaac N.        28     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Loring, John H.          24     Charlestown  Jan. 4, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Lovejoy, Alvin G.        31     Somerville   July 31,    Died Aug. 3,
                                              '61         1863, Baton
                                                          Rouge, La.

 Lufkin, Russell S.       40     Charlestown  Sept. 8,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '62         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Lunt, Charles H.         28     Charlestown  Jan. 2, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Lyman, Benjamin M.       34     Orange       Feb. 8, '64 Feb. 21, 1864,
                                                          disability.

 Lynch, Charles           24     Boston       July 31,    1862,
                                              '61         disability.

 Macomber, Alexander      21     Boston       Sept. 1,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Maphin, James            22     Chelsea      Jan. 8, '64 Transferred
                                                          Feb. 2, 1864,
                                                          to 28th Regt.

 Marble, Carlos           22     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Marsh, Lewis H.          23     Boston       July 31,    Jan. 5, 1864,
                                              '61         re-enlistment.

 Marsh, Lewis H.          25     Belmont      Jan. 6, '64 Died May 15,
                                                          1864, New
                                                          Orleans, La.

 Marsh, Rufus D.          18     Hadley       Jan. 4, '64 Mar. 17, '65,
                                                          disability.

 Marshall, W. Henry       32     Chelsea      Jan. 8, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Maxwell, Chauncey H.     24     Boston       July 31,    Died May 10,
                                              '61         1864,
                                                          Mansfield, La.

 Mayer, Philip, Jr.       19     Boston       July 31,    Apr. 10, 1864,
                                              '61         disability.

 McCarron, Richard        25     Roxbury      Jan. 18,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 McCracker, William       35     Boston       Dec. 2, '63 Dec. 20, 1863,
                                                          disability.

 McDonough, Thomas        30     Roxbury      Jan. 18,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 McGraugh, Patrick        29     Bridgewater  Sept. 1,    Transferred
                                              '64         Dec. 23, 1864,
                                                          to 13th
                                                          Battery.

 McKinley, Leonard        30     Charlestown  Sept. 13,   Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '62         expiration of
                                                          service.

 McMahon, John J.         24     Rockport     Aug. 29,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 McNulty, James H.        18     Lowell       Dec. 29,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '63         expiration of
                                                          service.

 McNally, Michael         21     Hadley       July 7, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Meier, Edward D.         22     Taunton      Dec. 30,    Sept. 9, 1864,
                                              '63         2d Lieut. 1st
                                                          La. Cav.

 Miller, William          32     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Moody, John F.           22     Bridgewater  Sept. 2,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Moody, Joseph            37     Orleans      Jan. 28,    Died Jan. 19,
                                              '64         1865,
                                                          Morganza, La.

 Morrison, James T.       35     Boston       Jan. 1, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Morton, Lemuel Q.        22     Boston       Jan. 4, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Moran, Michael           21     Rockport     Aug. 30,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Mousen, Francis          25     Hadley       Jan. 4, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Moulton, Harrison        20     Weymouth     July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Munroe, Thomas           36     Quincy       July 31,    Feb. 7, 1862,
                                              '61         disability.

 Murray, David            19     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Murphy, Francis          20     Bolton       Dec. 2, '63 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Murphy, John             21     Somerville   Mar. 15,    Transferred
                                              '64         Apr. 23, 1864
                                                          to Navy.

 Murphy, William J.       26     Boston       Jan. 25,    Jan. 28, 1864,
                                              '64         rejected
                                                          recruit.

 Newhall, Charles E.      24     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Newcomb, Charles J.      32     Norton       Sept. 17,   Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Newcomb, James           33     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Neil, James A.           19     Northbridge  June 30,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Nichols, Robert C.       27     Boston       July 31,    Nov. 5, 1862,
                                              '61         2d Lieut. 13th
                                                          Battery.

 O'Conner, Patrick        27     Chelsea      Dec. 31,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '63         expiration of
                                                          service.

 O'Donnell, Peter         21     Pittsfield   Jan. 4, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Owens, Michael           23     Dedham       Feb. 19,    Died Aug. ..,
                                              '64         1864,
                                                          transport
                                                          _Mississippi_.

 Packard, Addison F.      19     Templeton    Feb. 24,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Packard, Charles E.      21     Colrain      Sept. 3,    Transferred
                                              '64         Dec. 23, 1864
                                                          to 13th
                                                          Battery.

 Palmer, Edward A.        22     Charlestown  July 31,    1863,
                                              '61         promotion.

 Palmer, Thomas H.        26     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Parker, Gould E.         22     N.           Sept. 5,    Transferred
                                 Bridgewater  '64         Dec. 23, 1864,
                                                          to 6th
                                                          Battery.

 Partridge, Samuel        27     Boston       July 31,    Jan. 5, 1864,
                                              '61         re-enlistment.

 Payne, Charles           20     Templeton    Feb. 24,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Peck, George W.          19     Taunton      Sept. 5,    Transferred
                                              '64         Dec. 23, 1864,
                                                          to 13th
                                                          Battery.

 Peebles, John R.         28     Groton       Nov. 11,    Deserted Feb.
                                              '64         17, 1865,
                                                          Greenville,
                                                          La.

 Pelby, Charles           27     Boston       July 31,    Apr. 11, 1862,
                                              '61         disability.

 Pilkey, Francis          33     Hadley       Jan. 4, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Plymton, Andrew F.       35     Milford      Sept. 5,    Transferred
                                              '64         Dec. 23, 1864,
                                                          to 6th
                                                          Battery.

 Potter, Jeffrey M.       21     N.           Sept. 5,    Transferred
                                 Bridgewater  '64         Dec. 23, 1864
                                                          to 13th
                                                          Battery.

 Potter, Willis S.        19     Taunton      Sept. 5,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Prevoe, Joseph           29     Hadley       Jan. 4, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Presby, Mason W.         30     Boston       July 31,    Deserted, Jan.
                                              '61         1, 1862.

 Prince, Amasa T.         30     Brighton     Feb. 29,    Mar. 3, 1864,
                                              '64         rejected
                                                          recruit.

 Price, Theodore H.       38     Boston       July 31,    Died July ..,
                                              '61         1862,
                                                          Vicksburg,
                                                          Miss.

 Ray, Charles             23     Boston       July 31,    Nov. 1, 1861,
                                              '61         disability.

 Richer, William          18     Boston       Jan. 8, '63 Deserted July
                                                          1864,
                                                          Greenville,
                                                          La.

 Riordon, Hugh            23     Lenox        Jan. 5, '64 May 16, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Riordon, Timothy         21     Pittsfield   Jan. 4, '64 Killed Apr. 8,
                                                          1864, Sabine
                                                          Cross Roads.

 Riordon, William         35     Pittsfield   Feb. 29,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Robertson, Joshua F.     34     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Robertson, John H.       18     Colrain      Sept. 3,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Roberts, Thomas E.       23     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Rooney, James            37     Boston       Aug. 30,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Russell, David           28     Ashby        Sept. 3,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Ryder, Henry F.          23     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Richardson, Christopher  21     Haverhill    Nov. 15,    Aug. 11, 1865,
 C., Jr.                                      '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Russell, Isaac H.        23     Charlestown  July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Sampson, Charles H.      18     Boston       Dec. 21,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '63         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Sanborn, Charles O.      24     Medford      Feb. 1, '62 Jan. 31, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Sanborn, Cutler D.       21     Medford      July 31,    June 27, 1862,
                                              '61         disability.

 Sargent, Russell B.      36     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Schroder, Charles H.     18     Boston       Dec. 31,    Jan. 4, 1864,
                                              '63         rejected
                                                          recruit.

 Scott, Rufus P.          24     Hadley       Jan. 4, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Seavy, Leonard C.        24     Saco, Me.    July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Seaward, William         21     Duxbury      Jan. 21,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Sebeane, Silas           32     Hadley       Jan. 4, '64 ....

 Senter, Charles H.       28     Lynn         July 31,    ....
                                              '61

 Shaw, James              25     Charlestown  Sept. 8,    ....
                                              '62

 Skilton, Samuel P.       22     Charlestown  July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Snow, David W.           27     Colrain      Sept. 5,    Transferred
                                              '64         Dec. 23, 1864
                                                          to 6th
                                                          Battery.

 Smead, John              22     Colrain      Aug. 31,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Smith, James             21     Brighton     July 31,    Jan. 5, 1864,
                                              '61         re-enlistment.

 Smith, James             23     Boston       Jan. 6, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Smith, John              40     Roxbury      Sept. 15,   Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Smith, Stephen F.        31     Orleans      Jan. 28,    Died Nov. 1,
                                              '64         1864, New
                                                          Orleans, La.

 Spaulding, Joseph        44     Boston       Jan. 16,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Spaulding, Winfield S.   19     Boston       Aug. 16,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Spiller, James W.        36     Charlestown  July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Stevens, John E.         31     Melrose      July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Stimpson, Jefferson      38     Boston       Jan. 25,    Jan. 25, 1864,
                                              '64         rejected
                                                          recruit.

 Stone, Calvin            27     Boston       July 31,    Feb. 15, 1864,
                                              '61         re-enlistment.

 Stone, Calvin            29     Boston       Feb. 16,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Stone, Royal W.          33     Rowe         Aug. 30,    Jan. 30, 1865,
                                              '64         disability.

 Sullivan, Daniel         35     Boston       Jan. 30,    Transferred
                                              '64         Aug. 27, 1864,
                                                          to 165th N. Y.
                                                          V.

 Sullivan, Michael H.     20     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Sweet, George D.         21     Agawam       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Sweet, George W.         34     Taunton      Sept. 2,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Tate, James C.           36     Charlestown  July 31,    Aug. 11, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Tate, John M.            19     Charlestown  July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Tate, Moses F.           47     Charlestown  July 31,    Died Aug. 10,
                                              '61         1862, New
                                                          Orleans, La.

 Taylor, John             33     Quincy       July 31,    May 20, 1863,
                                              '61         disability.

 Thayer, Frederick L.     28     Taunton      Sept. 2,    June 11, 1765,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Thomas, David            38     Abington     Sept. 6,    Transferred
                                              '64         Dec. 23, 1864
                                                          to 6th
                                                          Battery.

 Thompson, Otis T.        30     Charlestown  Nov. 1, '61 Oct. 31, 1864,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Thompson, Peter          35     Somerville   July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Thibault, Cileste        32     Hadley       Jan. 4, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Thurber, James F.        18     Swanzey      Dec. 14,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Thrasher, Henry A.       27     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration.

 Tierney, Michael         24     Quincy       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration.

 Tilton, Daniel P.        33     Chelsea      Jan. 4, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Tirrell, David J.        44     Boston       July 31,    Nov. 1, 1861,
                                              '61         disability.

 Tracy, Wayne B.          23     Boston       July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Trundy, Justin H.        23     Ashby        Sept. 3,'64 June 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Tucker, James R.         24     Charlestown  July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Vaughn, Samuel T.        27     Charlestown  July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Viles, Daniel F.         21     Waltham      Jan. 4, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Walcott, Aaron F.        25     Boston       July 31,    Transferred
                                              '61         Dec. 6, 1861
                                                          to 3d Battery.

 Wallace, Alexander       27     Charlestown  Sept. 8,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '62         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Walker, Eugene C.        27     Brookline    Feb. 12,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Walker, John S., Jr.     18     Boston       Jan. 20,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Walsh, Yates             26     Boston       Feb. 2, '64 Transferred to
                                                          4th Battery.

 Walton, William W.       27     Taunton      Feb. 17,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Warner, Charles J.       19     Deerfield    Jan. 1, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Watkey, Edward           23     Boston       July 31,    Sept. 23,
                                              '61         1861,
                                                          disability.

 Wheeler, Howard O.       22     Boston       Jan. 4, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Whitmore, Benjamin F.    24     Boston       July 31,    Feb. 15, 1864,
                                              '61         re-enlistment.

 Whitcomb, Frederick      28     Somerville   Jan. 1, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 White, Henry J.          22     N.           Sept. 5,    Transferred
                                 Bridgewater  '64         Dec. 23, 1864,
                                                          to 6th
                                                          Battery.

 White, John              40     Boston       Dec. 6, '62 Aug. 16, 1864,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Whitney, John H.         21     Brookline    Feb. 12,    Aug. 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 White, Leonard N.        27     Stoughton    July 31,    Sept. 10,
                                              '61         1861,
                                                          disability.

 Whittemore, Peleg B.     40     Taunton      Sept. 2,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 White, Thomas            35     Charlestown  Sept. 10,   Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '62         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Wield, John              31     Charlestown  July 31,    Aug. 16, 1864,
                                              '61         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Wiggins, John R.         23     Chelsea      Jan. 5, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Williams, Charles        25     Chelsea      Aug. 5, '64 Aug. 11, 1865,
                                                          expiration of
                                                          service.

 Williams, Enos L.        21     Taunton      Sept. 5,    Transferred
                                              '64         Dec. 23, 1864,
                                                          to 13th
                                                          Battery.

 Wilson, William H. H.    25     Colrain      Sept. 5,    Transferred
                                              '64         Dec. 23, 1804,
                                                          to 6th
                                                          Battery.

 Woodward, Elias T.       29     Taunton      Sept. 5,    Transferred
                                              '64         Dec. 23, 1864,
                                                          to 6th
                                                          Battery.

 Woodward, Warren         34     Taunton      Sept. 2,    June 11, 1865,
                                              '64         expiration of
                                                          service.

 Young, Phillip S.        45     Wenham       Feb. 29,    July 28, 1864,
                                              '64         disability.




Transcriber's Notes:

Missing or obscured punctuation was corrected.

Typographical errors were silently corrected.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of History of the Second Massachusetts
Battery (Nims' Battery) of Light Artillery, 1861-1865, by Caroline E. Whitcomb

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 58531 ***
